The Project Gutenberg EBook of We, by Yevgeny Zamyatin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: We

Author: Yevgeny Zamyatin

Translator: Gregory Zilboorg

Release Date: April 27, 2020 [EBook #61963]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WE ***




Produced by Andrew Sly, Mary Glenn Krause, University of
Michigan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images
made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)






EUGENE ZAMIATIN

WE

Authorized Translation from the Russian

  By
  GREGORY ZILBOORG

  New York
  E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY
  681 FIFTH AVENUE


  Copyright, 1924
  By E. P. Dutton & Company

_All Rights Reserved_

Printed in the United States of America




FOREWORD


In submitting this book to the American public the translator has
this to say.

The artistic and psychological sides of the novel are hardly to
be discussed in a preface. Great as the art of a writer may be
and profound as his psychology may seem to one, the impression
is largely a matter of individual variations, and this side must
naturally be left to each individual's judgment and sensibilities.

There is, however, one side of the matter which deserves particular
mention and motivated emphasis.

It is perhaps for the first time in the history of the last few
decades that a Russian book, inspired by Russian life, written in
Russia and in the Russian language, should see its first light not
in Russia but abroad, and not in the language it was originally
written but translated into a foreign tongue. During the darkest
years of Russian history, in the 'forties, 'sixties, 'eighties and
'nineties of the last century, many Russian writers were forced by
oppression and reaction to live abroad and to write abroad, yet
their writings would reach Russia, as they were intended primarily
for the Russian reader and Russian life. Most of Turgeniev's novels
were written while he was in France, and with the exception of his
last short story which he dictated on his deathbed, all his novels
and stories were written in Russian. Hertzen, Kropotkin, and at one
time Dostoyevski, were similarly obliged to write while away from
their native land.

Here is a book written by an artist who lived and still lives in
Russia, and whose intimate love for Russia and her suffering is so
great that he finds it impossible to leave Russia even in these
days of stress and sorrow. But his book may not appear in the
country where it was written. It is a great tragedy--this spiritual
loneliness of the artist who cannot speak to his own people. In
bringing out this book in English, the author tries to address
himself to the world without having the opportunity of being heard
by his own people. This situation, however, is to a great extent
symbolic of the spiritual mission of Zamiatin, for no matter what
the language in which he originally writes, and no matter how
typically national his artistic perception and intuition, he is
essentially universal and his vision transcends the boundaries
of a purely national art. Moreover, is it not true that the more
genuinely national a man's art, and the more sincerely national his
personality, the more is he universal? Abraham Lincoln is more than
an American national figure, and I doubt if the appeal Lincoln's
personality makes would be universal as it is if he were not so
typically American. It is difficult to find personalities more
national than Tolstoi or Dostoyevski, and this is perhaps the reason
why they stand out as two of the most typically universal minds with
a universal appeal that the nineteenth century gave us.

Zamiatin is not so great as the men referred to above, but despite
his youth, he already proves to be the bearer of that quality of
greatness which characterizes a personality with a universal appeal.

_We_ is, as Zamiatin himself calls it, the most jocular and the
most earnest thing he has thus far written. It is a novel that
puts most poignantly and earnestly before every thoughtful reader
the most difficult problem that exists today in the civilized
world,--the problem of preservation of the independent original
creative personality. Our civilization today depends upon the
energetic movement of great masses of people. Wars, revolutions,
general strikes--all these phenomena involve great masses, large
groups, enormous mobs. Despite the fact that there is hardly a
corner in the world today where the average man does not make the
trite complaint, "What we need is leadership," the world today
seems for a time at least to have lost its capacity for producing
real leaders. For our great successes in mechanical civilization,
our exceptional efforts in efficiency, tend to bring into play
large numbers rather than great individualities. What under these
conditions is the lot of a creative individuality? What the tragedy
of an independent spirit under present conditions is, is pointed
out in an unique way in _We_. The problem of creative individuality
versus mob is today not a mere Russian problem. It is as poignant
under Bolshevist dictatorship as it is in Ford's factory.

Of course the sincere, honest and frank treatment of this problem
seems offensive to anyone who prefers to be a member of a mob or
keep this or that part of humanity in the state of a mob. That
is why _We_ could not see light in Russia, and will probably be
disliked by those whose spiritual activities are reduced to the
mechanical standards of a mechanical civilization which is devoid of
original creative effort.

A few words about the method by which Zamiatin tries to drive home
to the reader his main ideas. It is the method of "Laughter through
tears," to use an old expression of Gogol. It is the form which is
dictated by profound love for humanity, mixed with pity and hatred
of those factors which are the cause of the disindividualization of
man today. It is the old emotion of the ancient Catul: "Odi et amo."
Zamiatin laughs in order to hide his tears, hence amusing as _We_
may seem and really is, it barely conceals a profound human tragedy
which is universal today.

The reader may be interested in knowing something about Zamiatin
himself. Zamiatin does not like to tell about himself and the
translator does not think he has the right to tell more than to
quote Zamiatin's own answer to a request addressed to him a couple
of years ago to write his autobiography:

"I see you want my autobiography by all means, but I assure you
that you will have to limit yourself only to an outside inspection
and get but a glimpse, perhaps, into the dark windows. I seldom ask
anybody to enter.

"As to the outside, you will see a lonely child without playmates,
lying on a Turkish divan, hind-side up, reading a book, or under
the grand piano while his mother plays Chopin. Two steps away from
Chopin, just outside the window with the geraniums, in the middle of
the street, there is a small pig tied to a stake and hens fluttering
in the dust.

"If you are interested in the geography, here it is--Lebedyan, in
the most Russian Tambov province about which Tolstoi and Turgeniev
wrote so much. Chronology?--The end of the 'eighties and early
'nineties, then Voronesh, the _Gymnasium pension_, boredom and rabid
dogs on Main Street. One of these dogs got me by the leg. At that
time I loved to make different experiments on myself, and I decided
to wait and see whether I would or would not get the rabies and what
is most important, I was very curious: What would I feel when the
time would come for the rabies (about two weeks after the bite)? I
felt a great many things, but two weeks later I did not get the
rabies, therefore I announced to the inspector in the school that I
got the rabies and must go at once to Moscow for vaccination.

"In the _Gymnasium_ I would get _A plus_ for composition and was
not always on good terms with mathematics. Perhaps because of that
(sheer stubbornness) I chose the most mathematical career--the
ship-building department of the Petrograd Polytech.

"Thirteen years ago in the month of May--and that May was remarkable
in that the snow covered the flowers--I simultaneously finished my
work for my diploma and my first short story. The short story was
published in the old _Obrazovanye_.

"Well, what else do you want? That meant that I was going to write
short stories and was going to publish them. Therefore for the
following three years I wrote about nothing but ice cutters, steam
engines, refillers and 'The Theoretical Exploration of the Works of
Floating Steam Shovels.' I couldn't help myself. I was attached to
the chair of Ship Architecture and busied myself with teaching in
the ship-building faculty, where I teach until now.

"If I mean anything in Russian Literature, I owe this completely to
the Petrograd Secret Service. In 1911 this service exiled me from
Petrograd and I was forced to spend two years in a non-populated
place in Lachta. There, in the midst of the white winter silence
and the green summer silence, I wrote my _Provincial_. After that
the late Ismaylov expressed in print his belief that I wore very
high boots and was a long-haired provincial type, carrying a heavy
stick, and he was later very much surprised that I 'didn't look a
bit like that.' Incidentally, 'not a bit like that' I became in
England where, during the War, I spent about two years, building
ships and visiting the ruins of ancient castles. I listened to the
banging of the German Zeppelin bombs and wrote a short novel _The
Islanders_.

"I regret immensely that I did not witness the Russian Revolution
in February and know only the October Revolution, because it was in
October, a life preserver around my body and all the lights out,
passing German submarines, that I returned to Petrograd. Because
of this I felt like one who never having been in love gets up one
morning and finds himself married about ten years.

"Now I write little, perhaps because my requirements towards myself
become greater. Three new volumes are in the hands of the publisher
and begin to be published only now. The fourth will be my novel
_We_, the funniest and most earnest thing I have written. However,
the most serious and most interesting novels I never wrote. They
happened to me in my life."

  * * *

Zamiatin continues to live in Russia and continues to live with
Russia, but such is the sarcasm of Fate that the first Russian
novel giving a real synthesis of the Russian revolution and its
greater universal meaning, this novel written by Zamiatin, should
remain unknown to the Russians in Russia.

  Gregory Zilboorg.
  _New York_, 1924.




CONTENTS
                                                                  page

 Foreword                                     Gregory Zilboorg       v

 Record
   1. An Announcement--The Wisest of Lines--A Poem                   1
   2. Ballet--Square Harmony--X                                      4
   3. A Coat--A Wall--The Tables                                    12
   4. The Wild Man with the Barometer--Epilepsy--If                 18
   5. The Square--The Rulers of the World--An Agreeable and
        Useful Function                                             24
   6. An Accident--The Cursed "It's Clear"--Twenty-four Hours       28
   7. An Eyelash--Taylor--Henbane and Lily of the Valley            38
   8. An Irrational Root--R-13--The Triangle                        46
   9. Liturgy--Iambus--The Cast-Iron Hand                           53
  10. A Letter--A Membrane--Hairy I                                 59
  11. No, I Can't; Let It Be without Headings!                      70
  12. The Delimitation of the Infinite--Angel--Meditations
        on Poetry                                                   77
  13. Fog--Thou--A Decidedly Absurd Adventure                       83
  14. "Mine"--Impossible--A Cold Floor                              91
  15. The Bell--The Mirror-Like Sea--I am to Burn Eternally         95
  16. Yellow--A Two-dimensional Shadow--An Incurable Soul          102
  17. Through Glass--I Died--The Corridor                          111
  18. Logical Debris--Wounds and Plaster--Never Again              121
  19. The Infinitesimal of the Third Order--From Under the
        Forehead--Over the Railing                                 130
  20. Discharge--The Material of an Idea--The Zero Rock            139
  21. The Duty of an Author--The Ice-swells--The Most Difficult
        Love                                                       144
  22. The Benumbed Waves--Everything is Improving--I Am a Microbe  152
  23. Flowers--The Dissolution of a Crystal--If Only (?)           158
  24. The Limit of the Function--Easter--To Cross Out Everything   165
  25. The Descent from Heaven--The Greatest Catastrophe in
        History--The Known--Is Ended                               171
  26. The World Does Exist--Rash--Forty-one Degrees Centigrade     181
  27. No Headings. It Is Impossible                                187
  28. Both of Them--Entropy and Energy--The Opaque Part of
        the Body                                                   196
  29. Threads of the Face--Sprouts--An Unnatural Compression       207
  30. The Last Number--Galileo's Mistake--Would It Not Be Better   211
  31. The Great Operation--I Forgave Everything--The Collision
        of Trains                                                  217
  32. I Do Not Believe--Tractors--A Little Human Splinter          228
  33. This without a Synopsis, Hastily, the Last                   237
  34. The Forgiven Ones--A Sunny Night--A Radio-Walkryie           239
  35. In a Ring--A Carrot--A Murder                                251
  36. Empty Pages--The Christian God--About My Mother              260
  37. Infusorian--Doomsday--Her Room                               266
  38. I Don't Know What Title--Perhaps the Whole Synopsis May Be
        Called a Cast-off Cigarette-Butt                           272
  39. The End                                                      276
  40. Facts--The Bell--I Am Certain                                284




WE




RECORD ONE

  An Announcement
  The Wisest of Lines
  A Poem


This is merely a copy, word by word, of what was published this
morning in the State newspaper:

"In another hundred and twenty days the building of the _Integral_
will be completed. The great historic hour is near, when the first
_Integral_ will rise into the limitless space of the universe. A
thousand years ago your heroic ancestors subjected the whole earth
to the power of the United State. A still more glorious task is
before you,--the integration of the indefinite equation of the
Cosmos by the use of the glass, electric, fire-breathing _Integral_.
Your mission is to subjugate to the grateful yoke of reason the
unknown beings who live on other planets, and who are perhaps still
in the primitive state of freedom. If they will not understand that
we are bringing them a mathematically faultless happiness, our duty
will be to force them to be happy. But before we take up arms, we
shall try the power of words.

"In the name of The Well-Doer, the following is announced herewith
to all Numbers of the United State:

"Whoever feels capable must consider it his duty to write treatises,
poems, manifestoes, odes and other compositions on the greatness and
the beauty of the United State.

"This will be the first load which the _Integral_ will carry.

"Long live the United State! Long live the Numbers!! Long live the
Well-Doer!!!"

I feel my cheeks are burning as I write this. To integrate the
colossal, universal equation! To unbend the wild curve, to
straighten it out to a tangent--to a straight line! For the United
State is a straight line, a great, divine, precise, wise line, the
wisest of lines!

I, D-503, the builder of the _Integral_, I am only one of the many
mathematicians of the United State. My pen, which is accustomed to
figures, is unable to express the march and rhythm of consonance;
therefore I shall try to record only the things I see, the things
I think, or to be more exact, the things _we_ think. Yes, we; that
is exactly what I mean, and "We" shall, therefore, be the title of
my records. But this will only be a derivative of our life,--of our
mathematical, perfect life in the United State. If this be so, will
not this derivative be a poem in itself, despite my limitations? It
will. I believe, I know it.

I feel my cheeks are burning as I write this. I feel something
similar to what a woman probably feels when for the first time she
senses within herself the pulse of a tiny, blind, human being. It
is I, and at the same time it is not I. And for many long months it
will be necessary to feed it with my life, with my blood, and then
with a pain at my heart, to tear it from myself and lay it at the
feet of the United State.

Yet I am ready, as everyone, or nearly everyone of us, is. I am
ready.




RECORD TWO

  Ballet
  Square Harmony
  X


Spring. From behind the Green Wall from some unknown plains the
wind brings to us the yellow honeyed pollen of flowers. One's lips
are dry from this sweet dust. Every moment one passes one's tongue
over them. Probably, all women whom I meet in the street (and men
certainly also), have today sweet lips. This disturbs somewhat my
logical thinking. But the sky! The sky is blue. Its limpidness is
not marred by a single cloud. (How primitive was the taste of the
ancients, since their poets were always inspired by these senseless,
formless, stupidly rushing accumulations of steam!) I love, I am
sure it will not be an error if I say we love, only such a sky--a
sterile, faultless sky. On such days the whole universe seems to be
moulded of the same eternal glass, like the Green Wall, and like all
our buildings. On such days one sees into the very blue depth of
things. One sees their wonderful equations, hitherto unknown. One
sees them in everything, even in the most ordinary everyday things.

Here is an example: this morning I was on the dock where the
_Integral_ is being built, and I saw the lathes; blindly, with
abandon, the balls of the regulators were rotating; the cranks
were swinging from side to side with a glimmer; the working-beam
proudly swung its shoulder; and the mechanical chisels were dancing
to the melody of an unheard Tarantella. I suddenly perceived all
the music, all the beauty, of this colossal, of this mechanical
ballet, illumined by light blue rays of sunshine. Then the thought
came: why beautiful? Why is a dance beautiful? Answer: because it
is an _unfree_ movement. Because the deep meaning of the dance
is contained in its absolute, ecstatic submission, in the ideal
_non-freedom_. If it is true that our ancestors would abandon
themselves in dancing at the most inspired moments of their lives
(religious mysteries, military parades) then it means only one
thing: the instinct of non-freedom has been characteristic of human
nature from ancient times, and we in our life of today, we are only
consciously--

I was interrupted. The switchboard clicked. I raised my eyes,--O-90,
of course! In half a minute she herself will be here to take me for
the walk.

Dear O--! She always seems to me to look like her name, O--. She is
approximately ten centimeters shorter than the required Maternal
Norm. Therefore she appears all round; the rose-colored O of her
lips is open to meet every word of mine. She has a round soft dimple
on her wrist. Children have such dimples. As she came in, the
logical fly-wheel was still buzzing in my head, and following its
inertia, I began to tell her about my new formula which embraced the
machines and the dancers and all of us.

"Wonderful, isn't it!" I asked.

"Yes, wonderful ... Spring!" she replied, with a rosy smile.

You see? Spring! She talks about Spring! Females!... I became
silent.

We were down in the street. The avenue was crowded. On days when
the weather is so beautiful the afternoon personal hour is usually
the hour of the supplementary walk. As always the big Musical Tower
was playing with all its pipes, the March of the United State.
The Numbers, hundreds, thousands of Numbers in light blue unifs
(probably a derivative of the ancient _uniform_) with golden badges
on the chest,--the State number of each one, male or female,--the
Numbers were walking slowly, four abreast, exaltedly keeping
the step. I, we four, were but one of the innumerable waves of
a powerful torrent. To my left, O-90 (if one of my long-haired
ancestors were writing this a thousand years ago, he would probably
call her by that funny word, _mine_), to my right, two unknown
Numbers, a she-Number and a he-Number.

Blue sky, tiny baby suns in each one of our badges; our faces are
unclouded by the insanity of thoughts. Rays.... Do you picture it?
Everything seems to be made of a kind of smiling, a ray-like matter.
And the brass measures: Tra-ta-ta-tam.... Tra-ta-ta-tam ... stamping
on the brassy steps which sparkle in the sun; with every step you
rise higher and higher into the dizzy blue heights.... Then, as this
morning on the dock, again I saw as if for the first time in my
life, the impeccably straight streets, the glistening glass of the
pavement, the divine parallelopipeds of the transparent dwellings,
the square harmony of the grayish-blue rows of Numbers. And it
seemed to me that not past generations, but I myself, had won a
victory over the old god and the old life, that I myself had created
all this. I felt like a tower: I was afraid to move my elbow, lest
the walls, the cupola and the machines should fall to pieces.

Then without warning--a jump through centuries: I remembered
(apparently through an association by contrast) a picture in
the museum, a picture of an avenue of the twentieth century,
a thundering many-colored confusion of men, wheels, animals,
bill-boards, trees, colors, and birds.... They say all this once
actually existed!

It seemed to me so incredible, so absurd, that I lost control of
myself and laughed aloud. A laugh, as if an echo of mine, reached my
ear from the right. I turned. I saw white, very white, sharp teeth,
and an unfamiliar female face.

"I beg your pardon," she said, "but you looked about you like an
inspired mythological god on the seventh day of creation. You look
as though you are sure that I, too, was created by you, by no one
but you. It is very flattering."

All this without a smile, even with a certain degree of respect--(she
may know that I am the builder of the _Integral_). In her eyes
nevertheless, in her brows, there was a strange irritating X, and
I was unable to grasp it, to find an arithmetical expression for
it. Somehow I was confused; with a somewhat hazy mind, I tried
logically to motivate my laughter.

"It was absolutely clear that this contrast, this impassable abyss,
between the things of today and of years ago--"

"But why impassable?" (What bright, sharp teeth!) "One might throw a
bridge over that abyss. Please imagine: a drum battalion, rows,--all
this existed before and consequently--"

"Oh, yes, it is clear," I exclaimed.

It was a remarkable intersection of thoughts. She said almost in
the same words the things I wrote down before the walk! Do you
understand? Even the thoughts! It is because nobody is _one_, but
_one of_. We are all so much alike--

"Are you sure?" I noticed her brows which rose to the temples in an
acute angle,--like the sharp corners of an X. Again I was confused,
casting a glance to the right, then to the left. To my right--she,
slender, abrupt, resistantly flexible like a whip, I-330 (I saw her
number now). To my left, O-, totally different, made all of circles
with a child-like dimple on her wrist; and at the very end of our
row, an unknown he-Number, double-curved like the letter S. We were
all so different from one another....

The one to my right, I-330, apparently caught my confused eye, for
she said with a sigh, "Yes, alas!"

I don't deny that this exclamation was quite in place, but again
there was something in her face or in her voice....

With an abruptness unusual for me, I said, "Why 'alas'? Science is
developing and if not now, then within fifty or one hundred years--"

"Even the noses will--"

"Yes, noses!" This time I almost shouted, "Since there is still a
reason, no matter what, for envy.... Since my nose is button-like
and someone else's is--"

"Well your nose is rather classic, as they would say in the ancient
days, although your hands--No, no, show me your hands!"

I hate to have anyone look at my hands; they are covered with
long hair,--a stupid atavism. I stretched out my hand and said as
indifferently as I could, "Ape-like."

She glanced at my hand, then at my face.

"No, a very curious harmony."

She weighed me with her eyes as though with scales. The little horns
again appeared at the corners of her brows.

"He is registered in my name," exclaimed O-90 with a rosy smile.

I made a grimace. Strictly speaking, she was out of order. This dear
O-, how shall I say it? the speed of her tongue is not correctly
calculated; the speed per second of her tongue should be slightly
less than the speed per second of her thoughts,--at any rate not the
reverse.

At the end of the avenue the big bell of the Accumulating Tower
resounded seventeen. The personal hour was at an end. I-330 was
leaving us with that S-like he-Number. He has such a respectable,
and I noticed then, such a familiar face. I must have met him
somewhere, but where I could not remember. Upon leaving me I-330
said with the same X-like smile:

"Drop in day after tomorrow at auditorium 112."

I shrugged my shoulders: "If I am assigned to the auditorium you
just named--"

She, with a peculiar, incomprehensible certainty: "You will."

The woman had upon me a disagreeable effect, like an irrational
component of an equation which you cannot eliminate. I was glad to
remain alone with dear O-, at least for a short while. Hand in hand
with her, I passed four lines of avenues; at the next corner she
went to the right, I to the left. O- timidly raised her round blue
crystalline eyes:

"I would like so much to come to you today and pull down the
curtains, especially today, right now...."

How funny she is. But what could I say to her? She was with me only
yesterday and she knows as well as I that our next sexual day is
day-after-tomorrow. It is merely another case in which her thoughts
are too far ahead. It sometimes happens that the spark comes too
early to the motor.

At parting I kissed her twice--no, I shall be exact, three times, on
her wonderful blue eyes, such clear, unclouded eyes.




RECORD THREE

  A Coat
  A Wall
  The Tables


I looked over all that I wrote down yesterday and I find that
my descriptions are not sufficiently clear. That is, everything
would undoubtedly be clear to one of us but who knows to whom my
_Integral_ will some day bring these records? Perhaps you, like
our ancestors, have read the great book of civilization only up to
the page of nine hundred years ago. Perhaps you don't know even
such elementary things as the Hour Tables, Personal Hours, Maternal
Norm, Green Wall, Well-Doer. It seems droll to me and at the same
time very difficult, to explain these things. It is as though, let
us say, a writer of the twentieth century should start to explain
in his novel such words as coat, apartment, wife. Yet if his novel
had been translated for primitive races, how could he have avoided
explaining what a coat meant? I am sure that the primitive man would
look at a coat and think, "What is this for? It is only a burden,
an unnecessary burden." I am sure that you will feel the same, if I
tell you that not one of us has ever stepped beyond the Green Wall
since the Two Hundred Years' War.

But, dear readers, you must think, at least a little. It helps.

It is clear that the history of mankind as far as our knowledge
goes, is a history of the transition from nomadic forms to more
sedentary ones. Does it not follow that the most sedentary form of
life (ours) is at the same time, the most perfect one? There was a
time when people were rushing from one end of the earth to another,
but this was the prehistoric time when such things as nations, wars,
commerce, different discoveries of different Americas still existed.
Who has need of these things now?

I admit humanity acquired this habit of a sedentary form of life not
without difficulty and not at once. When the Two Hundred Years' War
had destroyed all the roads which later were overgrown with grass,
it was probably very difficult at first. It seemed uncomfortable to
live in cities which were cut off from each other by green debris.
But what of it? Man soon after he lost his tail probably did not
learn at once how to chase away flies without its help. I am almost
sure that at first he was even lonesome without his tail, but now,
can you imagine yourself with a tail? Or can you imagine yourself
walking in the street naked, without clothes? (It is possible you go
without clothes still.) Here we have the same case. I cannot imagine
a city which is not clad with a Green Wall; I cannot imagine a life
which is not clad with the figures of our Tables.

Tables.... Now even, purple figures look at me austerely yet kindly
from the golden background of the wall. Involuntarily I am reminded
of the thing which was called by the ancients, "Sainted Image," and
I feel a desire to compose verses, or prayers which are the same.
Oh, why am not I a poet, so as to be able properly to glorify the
Tables, the heart and pulse of the United State!

All of us and perhaps all of you read in childhood while in school,
that greatest of all monuments of ancient literature, the Official
Railroad Guide. But if you compare this with the Tables, you
will see side by side graphite and diamonds. Both are the same,
carbon. But how eternal, transparent, how shining the diamond!
Who does not lose his breath when he runs through the pages of
the Guide? The Tables transformed each one of us, actually, into
a six-wheeled steel hero of a great poem. Every morning with
six-wheeled precision, at the same hour, at the same minute, we wake
up, millions of us at once. At the very same hour millions like
one we begin our work, and millions like one, we finish it. United
into a single body with a million hands, at the very same second,
designated by the Tables, we carry the spoons to our mouths; at the
same second we all go out to walk, go to the auditorium, to the
halls for the Taylor exercises and then to bed.

I shall be quite frank: even we have not attained the absolute,
exact solution of the problem of happiness. Twice a day, from
sixteen to seventeen o'clock and from twenty-one to twenty-two, our
united powerful organism dissolves into separate cells; these are
the personal hours designated by the Tables. During these hours
you would see the curtains discreetly drawn in the rooms of some;
others march slowly over the pavement of the main avenue or sit at
their desks as I sit now. But I firmly believe, let them call me
an idealist and a dreamer, I believe that sooner or later we shall
somehow find even for these hours, a place in the general formula.
Somehow, all of the 86,400 seconds will be incorporated in the
Tables of Hours.

I have had opportunity to read and hear many improbable things about
those times when human beings still lived in the state of freedom,
that is, an unorganized primitive state. One thing has always
seemed to me the most improbable: how could a government, even a
primitive government, permit people to live without anything like
our Tables,--without compulsory walks, without precise regulation
of the time to eat, for instance? They would get up and go to bed
whenever they liked. Some historians even say that in those days the
streets were lighted all night; and all night people went about the
streets.

That I cannot understand; true, their minds were rather limited in
those days. Yet they should have understood, should they not, that
such a life was actually wholesale murder, although slow murder,
day after day? The State (humanitarianism) forbade in those days the
murder of one person, but it did not forbid the killing of millions
slowly and by half. To kill one, that is, to reduce the general
sum of human life by fifty years, was considered criminal, but to
reduce the general sum of human life by fifty million years was not
considered criminal! Is it not droll? Today this simple mathematical
moral problem could easily be solved in half a minute's time by any
ten-year-old Number, yet _they_ couldn't do it! All their Immanuel
Kants together couldn't do it! It didn't enter the heads of all
their Kants to build a system of scientific ethics, that is, ethics
based on adding, subtracting, multiplying and dividing.

Further, is it not absurd that their State (they called it State!)
left sexual life absolutely without control? However, whenever and
as much as they wanted.... Absolutely unscientific like beasts; and
like beasts they blindly gave birth to children! Is it not strange
to understand gardening, chicken-farming, fishery (we have definite
knowledge that they were familiar with all these things), and not
to be able to reach the last step in this logical scale, namely,
production of children,--not to be able to discover such things as
Maternal and Paternal Norms?

It is so droll, so improbable, that while I write this I am afraid
lest you, my unknown future readers, should think I am merely a bad
jester. I feel almost as though you may think I simply want to mock
you and with a most serious appearance try to relate to you absolute
nonsense. But first, I am incapable of jesting, for in every joke a
lie has its hidden function. And second, the science of the United
State contends that the life of the ancients was exactly what I
am describing, and the science of the United State cannot make a
mistake! Yet how could they have State logic, since they lived in a
condition of freedom like beasts, like apes, like herds? What could
one expect of them, since even in our day one hears from time to
time, coming from the bottom, the primitive depths, the echo of the
apes?

Fortunately it happens only from time to time, very seldom. Happily
it is only a case of small parts breaking; these may easily be
repaired without stopping the eternal great march of the whole
machine. And in order to eliminate a broken peg we have the skillful
heavy hand of the Well-Doer, we have the experienced eyes of the
Guardians....

By the way, I just thought of that Number whom I met yesterday,
the double-curved one like the letter S; I think I have seen him
several times coming out of the Bureau of the Guardians. Now I
understand why I felt such an instinctive respect for him and a
kind of awkwardness when that strange I-330 at his side.... I must
confess that, that I-- ... they ring the bell, time to sleep, it is
twenty-two-thirty. Till tomorrow, then.




RECORD FOUR

  The Wild Man with a Barometer
  Epilepsy
  If


Until today everything in life seemed to me clear (that is why, I
think, I always had a sort of partiality toward the word "clear"),
but today ... I don't understand. First, I really was assigned
to auditorium 112 as she said, although the probability was as
500:10,000,000 or 1:20,000. (500 is the number of auditoriums and
there are 10,000,000 Numbers.) And second ... but let me relate
things in successive order. The auditorium: an enormous half-globe
of glass with the sun piercing through. The circular rows of
noble, globe-like, closely-shaven heads. With joy in my heart I
looked around. I believe I was looking in the hope of seeing the
rose-colored scythe, the dear lips of O-, somewhere among the blue
waves of the unifs. Then I saw extraordinarily white, sharp teeth
like the.... But no! Tonight at twenty-one o'clock O- was to come
to me; therefore my desire to see her was quite natural. The bell.
We stood up, sang the Hymn of the United State, and our clever
phono-lecturer appeared on the platform with a sparkling golden
megaphone.

"Respected Numbers, not so long ago our archaeologists dug up a
book written in the twentieth century. In this book the ironical
author tells about a Wild Man and a barometer. The Wild Man noticed
that every time the barometer's hand stopped on the word 'rain,' it
actually rained. And as the Wild Man craved rain, he let out as much
mercury as was necessary to put it at the level of the word 'rain'
(on the screen a Wild Man with feathers, letting out the mercury.
Laughter).

"You are laughing at him, but don't you think the 'European' of that
age deserves more to be laughed at? He, like the Wild Man, wanted
rain,--rain with a little r, an algebraic rain; but he remained
standing before the barometer like a wet hen. The Wild Man at least
had more courage and energy and logic, although primitive logic. The
Wild Man showed the ability to establish a connection between cause
and effect: by letting out the mercury he made the first step on the
path which...."

Here (I repeat, I am not concealing anything, I am setting down
everything) I suddenly became impermeable to the quickening currents
coming from the megaphone. I suddenly felt I had come here in
vain (why in vain and how could I not have come here, where I
was assigned?). Everything seemed to me empty like a shell. I
succeeded with difficulty in switching my attention in again when
the phono-lecturer came to the main theme of the evening,--to our
music as a mathematical composition (mathematics is the cause,
music the effect). The phono-lecturer began the description of the
recently invented musicometer.

"... By merely rotating this handle any one is enabled to produce
about three sonatas per hour. What difficulties our predecessors
had in making music! They were able to compose only by bringing
themselves to strokes of inspiration,--an extinct form of epilepsy.
Here you have an amusing illustration of their achievements: the
music of Scriabin, twentieth century. This black box," (a curtain
parted on the platform, and we saw an ancient instrument) "this box
they called the 'Royal Grand.' They attached to this the idea of
_regality_, which also goes to prove how their music...."

And I don't remember anything further. Very possibly because ...
I'll tell you frankly, because she, I-330, came to the "Royal" box.
Probably I was simply startled by her unexpected appearance on the
platform.

She was dressed in a fantastic dress of the ancient time, a black
dress closely fitting the body, sharply delimiting the white of her
shoulders and breast and that warm shadow waving with her breath
between.... And the dazzling, almost angry teeth. A smile, a bite,
directed downward. She took her seat; she began to play something
wild, convulsive, loud like all their life then,--not a shadow of
rational mechanism. Of course all those around me were right; they
were laughing. Only a few ... but why is it that I too, I...?

Yes, epilepsy, a mental disease, a pain. A slow, sweet pain,
bite, and it goes deeper and becomes sharper. And then, slowly,
sunshine,--not our sunshine, not crystalline, bluish and soft,
coming through the glass bricks. No, a wild sunshine, rushing and
burning, tearing everything into small bits....

The Number at my left glanced at me and chuckled. I don't know why
but I remember exactly how a microscopic saliva bubble appeared on
his lips and burst. That bubble brought me back to myself. I was
again I.

Like all the other Numbers I heard now only the senseless,
disorderly cracking of the chords. I laughed; I felt so light and
simple. The gifted phono-lecturer represented to us only too well
that wild epoch. And that was all.

With what a joy I listened afterward to our contemporary music. It
was demonstrated to us at the end of the lecture for the sake of
contrast. Crystalline, chromatic scales converging and diverging
into endless series; and synthetic harmony of the formulae of Taylor
and McLauren, wholesome, square and massive like the "trousers
of Pythagoras." Sad melodies dying away in waving movements.
The beautiful texture of the spectrum of planets, dissected by
Frauenhofer lines ... what magnificent, what perfect regularity!
How pitiful the wilful music of the ancients, not limited except by
the scope of their wild imaginations!

As usual in good order, four abreast, all of us left the auditorium.
The familiar double-curved figure passed swiftly by. I respectfully
bowed.

Dear O- was to come in an hour. I felt agitated,--agreeably and
usefully. Home at last! I rushed to the house-office, handed over
to the controller on duty my pink ticket and received a certificate
permitting the use of the curtains. This right exists in our State
only for the sexual days. Normally we live surrounded by transparent
walls which seem to be knitted of sparkling air; we live beneath
the eye of everyone, always bathed in light. We have nothing to
conceal from one another; besides, this mode of living makes the
difficult and exalted task of the Guardians much easier. Without it
many bad things might happen. It is possible that the strange opaque
dwellings of the ancients were responsible for their pitiful cellish
psychology. "My (_sic!_) home is my fortress!" How did they manage
to think of such things?

At twenty-two o'clock I lowered the curtain and at the same second
O- came in smiling, slightly out of breath. She extended to me
her rosy lips and her pink ticket. I tore off the stub but I
could not tear myself away from the rosy lips up to the last
moment,--twenty-two-fifteen.

Then I showed her my diary and I talked; I think I talked very
well on the beauty of a square, a cube, a straight line. At first
she listened so charmingly, she was so rosy, when suddenly a tear
appeared in her blue eyes, then another, and a third fell straight
on the open page (page 7). The ink blurred; well, I shall have to
copy it again.

"My dear O-, if only you, if...."

"What if? If what?"

Again the old lament about a child or perhaps something new
regarding, regarding ... the other one? Although it seems as though
some ... but that would be too absurd!




RECORD FIVE

  The Square
  The Rulers of the World
  An Agreeable and Useful Function


Again with you, my unknown reader; I talk to you as though you
were, let us say, my old comrade, R-13, the poet with the lips of a
negro,--well, everyone knows him. Yet you are somewhere on the moon,
or on Venus, or on Mars. Who knows you? Where and who are you?

Imagine a square, a living, beautiful square. Imagine that this
square is obliged to tell you about itself, about its life. You
realize that this square would hardly think it necessary to mention
the fact that all its four angles are equal. It knows this too
well. This is such an ordinary, obvious thing. I am in exactly
the same square position. Take the pink checks for instance,
and all that goes with them: for me they are as natural as the
equality of the four angles of the square. But for you they are
perhaps more mysterious and hard to understand than the binom of
Newton. Let me explain: an ancient sage once said a clever thing
(accidentally, beyond doubt). He said, "Love and Hunger rule the
world." Consequently, to dominate the world, man had to win a
victory over hunger after paying a very high price. I refer to the
great Two Hundred Years' War, the war between the city and the land.
Probably on account of religious prejudices, the primitive peasants
stubbornly held on to their "bread."[1] In the 35th year before the
foundation of the United State, our contemporary petroleum food was
invented. True, only about two-tenths of the population of the globe
did not die out. But how beautifully shining the face of the earth
became when it was cleared of its impurities!

[1] This word came down to us for use only as a poetic form, for the
chemical constitution of this substance is unknown to us.

Accordingly the 0.2 which survived, have enjoyed the greatest
happiness in the bosom of the United State. But is it not clear that
supreme bliss and envy are only the numerator and the denominator
respectively, of the same fraction, happiness? What sense would the
innumerable sacrifices of the Two Hundred Years' War have for us
if a reason were left in our life for jealousy? Yet such a reason
persisted because there remained button-like noses and classical
noses (_Cf_: our conversation during the promenade). For there were
some whose love was sought by everyone and others whose love was
sought by no one.

Naturally, having conquered hunger (that is, algebraically speaking,
having achieved the total of bodily welfare), the United State
directed its attack against the second ruler of the world, against
love. At last this element also was conquered, that is, organized
and put into a mathematical formula. It is already three hundred
years since our great historic Lex Sexualis was promulgated: "A
Number may obtain a license to use any other Number as a sexual
product."

The rest is only a matter of technique. You are carefully examined
in the laboratory of the Sexual Department where they find the
content of the sexual hormones in your blood, and they make out for
you accordingly a Table of sexual days. Then you file an application
to enjoy the services of Number so and so, or Numbers so and so. You
get for that purpose a check-book (pink). That is all.

It is clear that under such circumstances there is no more reason
for envy or jealousy. The denominator of the fraction of happiness
is reduced to zero and the whole fraction is thus converted into
a magnificent infiniteness. The thing which was for the ancients
the source of innumerable stupid tragedies has been converted in
our time into an harmonious, agreeable and useful function of the
organism, a function like sleep, like physical labor, the taking
of food, digestion, etc., etc. Hence you see how the great power
of logic purifies everything it happens to touch. Oh, if only you
unknown readers can conceive this divine power! If you will only
learn to follow it to the end!

It is very strange: while I was writing today of the loftiest
summit of human history, all the while I breathed the purest
mountain air of thought, but within me it was and remains cloudy,
cobwebby, and there is a kind of cross-like, four-pawed X. Or
perhaps it is my paws and I feel like that only because they are
always before my eyes, my hairy paws. I don't like to talk about
them. I dislike them. They are a trace of a primitive epoch. Is it
possible that there is in me...?

I wanted to strike out all this because it trespasses on the limits
of my synopsis. But then I decided: no, I shall not! Let this diary
give the curve of the most imperceptible vibrations of my brain,
like a precise seismograph, for at times such vibrations serve as
forewarnings.... Certainly this is absurd! This certainly should be
stricken out; we have conquered all the elements; catastrophes are
not possible any more.

Now everything is clear to me. The peculiar feeling inside is a
result of that very same square situation of which I spoke in the
beginning. There is no X in me. There can be none. I am simply
afraid lest some X will be left in you, my unknown readers. I
believe you will understand that it is harder for me to write than
it ever was for any author throughout human history. Some of them
wrote for contemporaries, some for the future generations but
none of them ever wrote for their ancestors, or beings like their
primitive, distant ancestors.




RECORD SIX

  An Accident
  The Cursed "It's Clear"
  Twenty-four Hours


I must repeat, I made it my duty to write concealing nothing.
Therefore I must point out now that sad as it may be, the process
of hardening and crystallization of life has evidently not been
completed even here in our State. A few steps remain to be made
before we reach the ideal. The ideal (it's clear), is to be found
where nothing _happens_, but here.... I will give you an example: in
the State paper I read that in two days the holiday of Justice will
be celebrated on the Plaza of the Cube. This means that again some
Number has impeded the smooth run of the great State machine. Again
something that was not foreseen, or forecalculated _happened_.

Besides, something _happened_ to me. True, it occurred during the
personal hour, that is during the time specifically assigned to
unforeseen circumstances, yet....

At about sixteen (to be exact, ten minutes to sixteen), I was at
home. Suddenly the telephone: "D-503?"--a woman's voice.

"Yes."

"Are you free?"

"Yes."

"It is I, I-330. I shall run over to you immediately. We shall go
together to the Ancient House. Agreed?"

I-330!... This I- irritates me, repels me. She almost frightens me;
but just because of that I answered, "Yes."

In five minutes we were in an aero. Blue sky of May. The light sun
in its golden aero buzzed behind us without catching up and without
lagging behind. Ahead of us a white cataract of a cloud. Yes, a
white cataract of a cloud nonsensically fluffy like the cheeks of
an ancient cupid. That cloud was disturbing. The front window was
open; it was windy; lips were dry. Against one's will one passed the
tongue constantly over them and thought about lips.

Already we saw in the distance the hazy green spots on the other
side of the Wall. Then a slight involuntary sinking of the heart,
down--down--down, as if from a steep mountain, and we were at the
Ancient House.

That strange, delicate, blind establishment is covered all around
with a glass shell, otherwise it would undoubtedly have fallen
to pieces long ago. At the glass door we found an old woman all
wrinkles, especially her mouth which was all made up of folds and
pleats. Her lips had disappeared, having folded inward; her mouth
seemed grown together. It seemed incredible that she should be able
to talk and yet she did:

"Well, dear, come again to see my little house?"

Her wrinkles shone, that is, her wrinkles diverged like rays, which
created the impression of shining.

"Yes, grandmother," answered I-330.

The wrinkles continued to shine.

"And the sun, eh,--do you see it, you rogue, you! I know, I know.
It's all right. Go all by yourselves,--I shall remain here in the
sunshine."

Hmm.... Apparently my companion was a frequent guest here. Something
disturbed me; probably that unpleasant optical impression,--the
cloud on the smooth blue surface of the sky.

While we were ascending the wide, dark stairs, I-330 said, "I love
her, that old woman."

"Why?"

"I don't know. Perhaps for her mouth,--or perhaps for nothing, just
so."

I shrugged my shoulders. She continued walking upstairs with a faint
smile or perhaps without a smile at all.

I felt very guilty. It is clear that there must not be "love, just
so," but "love because of." For all elements of nature should be....

"It's clear ..." I began, but I stopped at that word and cast
a furtive look at I-330. Did she notice it or not? She looked
somewhere, down; her eyes were closed like curtains.

It struck me suddenly: evening about twenty-two; you walk on the
avenue and among the brightly lighted, transparent, cubic cells, are
dark spaces, lowered curtains, and there behind the curtains....
What has she behind her curtains? Why did she phone me today? Why
did she bring me here? and all this....

She opened a heavy, squeaking, opaque door and we found ourselves
in a sombre disorderly space (they called it an "apartment"). The
same strange "royal" musical instrument and a wild, unorganized,
crazy loudness of colors and forms like their ancient music. A white
plane above, dark blue walls, red, green, orange bindings of ancient
books, yellow bronze candelabras, a statue of Buddha, furniture
with lines distorted by epilepsy, impossible to reduce to any clear
equation.

I could hardly bear that chaos. But my companion apparently
possessed a stronger constitution.

"This is my most beloved--" she suddenly caught herself (again a
smile,--bite, and white sharp teeth), "to be more exact, the most
nonsensical of all 'apartments'."

"Or to be most exact, of all the States. Thousands of microscopic
States, fighting eternal wars, pitiless like--"

"Oh yes, it's clear," said I-330 with apparent sincerity.

We passed through a room where we found a few small children's beds
(children in those days were also private property). Then more
rooms, glimmering mirrors, sombre closets, unbearably loud-colored
divans, an enormous "fireplace," a large mahogany bed. Our
contemporary beautiful, transparent, eternal glass was represented
here only by pitiful, delicate, tiny squares of windows.

"And to think; here there was love 'just so'; they burned and
tortured themselves" (again the curtain of the eyes was lowered),
"What a stupid, uneconomical spending of human energy. Am I not
right?"

She spoke as though reading my thoughts but in her smile there
remained always that irritating X. There behind the curtains
something was going on, I don't know what, but something that made
me lose my patience. I wanted to quarrel with her, to scream at her
(exactly, to scream), but I had to agree. It was impossible not to
agree.

We stopped in front of a mirror. At that moment I saw only her eyes.
An idea came to me: human beings are built as nonsensically as these
stupid "apartments," human heads are opaque, and there are only two
very small windows that lead inside,--the eyes. She seemed to have
guessed my thoughts; she turned around: "Well, here they are, my
eyes,--well" (this suddenly, then silence).

There were in front of me two gloomy dark windows and behind them
inside, such strange hidden life. I saw there only fire, burning
like a peculiar "fireplace" and unknown figures resembling....

All this was certainly very natural; I saw in her eyes the
reflection of my own face. But my feelings were unnatural and not
like me. Evidently the depressing influence of the surroundings was
beginning to tell on me. I felt definitely fear. I felt as if I were
trapped and caged in a strange cage. I felt that I was caught in the
wild hurricane of ancient life.

"Do you know ..." said I-330, "step out for a moment into the next
room." Her voice came from there,--from inside, from behind the dark
window-eyes,--where the fireplace was blazing.

I went out, sat down. From a shelf on the wall there looked
straight into my face, somewhat smiling, a snub-nosed, asymmetrical
physiognomy of one of the ancient poets; I think it was Pushkin.

"Why do I sit here enduring this smile with such resignation and
what is this all about? Why am I here? And why all these strange
sensations, this irritating, repellent female, this strange game?"

The door of the closet slammed; there was the rustle of silk. I
felt it difficult to restrain myself from getting up and, and.... I
don't remember exactly; probably I wanted to tell her a number of
disagreeable things. But she had already appeared.

She was dressed in a short bright-yellowish dress, black hat, black
stockings. The dress was of light silk,--I saw clearly very long
black stockings above the knees, an uncovered neck and the shadow
between....

"It's clear that you want to seem original. But is it possible that
you--?"

"It is clear," interrupted I-330, "that to be original means to
stand out among others; consequently to be original means to violate
the law of equality. What was called in the language of the ancients
'to be common' is with us only the fulfilling of one's duty. For--"

"Yes, yes, exactly," I interrupted impatiently, "and there is no
use, no use...."

She came near the bust of the snub-nosed poet, lowered the curtains
on the wild fire of her eyes and said, this time I think she was
really in earnest, or perhaps she merely wanted to soften my
impatience with her, but she said a very reasonable thing:

"Don't you think it surprising that once people could stand types
like this? Not only stand them but worship them. What a slavish
spirit, don't you think so?"

"It's clear ... that is...!" I wanted ... (damn that cursed "it's
clear!").

"Oh, yes, I understand. But in fact these were rulers stronger than
the crowned ones. Why were they not isolated and exterminated? In
our State--"

"Oh, yes, in our State--" I began.

Suddenly she laughed. I saw the laughter in her eyes. I saw the
resounding sharp curve of that laughter, flexible, tense like a
whip. I remember my whole body shivered. I thought of grasping her
... and I don't know what.... I had to do something, mattered little
what; automatically I looked at my golden badge, glanced at my
watch,--ten minutes to seventeen!

"Don't you think it is time to go?" I said in as polite a tone as
possible.

"And if I should ask you to stay here with me?"

"What? Do you realize what you are saying? In ten minutes I must be
in the auditorium."

"And 'all the Numbers must take the prescribed courses in art and
science'," said I-330 with my voice.

Then she lifted the curtain, opened her eyes,--through the dark
windows the fire was blazing.

"I have a physician in the Medical Bureau; he is registered to me;
if I ask him, he will give you a certificate declaring that you are
ill. All right?"

Understood! At last I understood where this game was leading.

"Ah, so! But you know that every honest Number as a matter of course
must immediately go to the office of the Guardians and--"

"And as a matter not of course?" (Sharp smile-bite) "I am very
curious to know; will you or will you not go to the Guardians?"

"Are you going to remain here?"

I grasped the knob of the door. It was a brass knob, a cold, brass
knob and I heard, cold like brass, her voice:

"Just a minute, may I?"

She went to the telephone, called a Number,--I was so upset it
escaped me,--and spoke loudly: "I shall be waiting for you in the
Ancient House. Yes, yes, alone."

I turned the cold brass knob.

"May I take the aero?"

"Oh yes, certainly, please!"

In the sunshine at the gate the old woman was dozing like a plant.
Again I was surprised to see her grown-together mouth open, and to
hear her say:

"And your lady, did she remain alone?"

"Alone."

The mouth of the old woman grew together again; she shook her head;
apparently even her weakening brain understood the stupidity and the
danger of the behaviour of that woman.

At seventeen o'clock exactly, I was at the lecture. There I suddenly
realized that I did not tell the whole truth to the old woman. I-330
was not there alone _now_. Possibly this fact, that I involuntarily
told the old woman a lie, was torturing me now and distracting my
attention. Yes, not alone,--that was the point.

After twenty-one-thirty o'clock I had a free hour. I could therefore
have gone to the office of the Guardians to make my report; but
after that stupid adventure I was so tired--besides, the law
provides two days. I shall have time tomorrow; I have another
twenty-four hours.




RECORD SEVEN

  An Eyelash
  Taylor
  Henbane and Lily of the Valley


Night. Green, orange, blue. The red royal instrument. The yellow
dress. Then a brass Buddha. Suddenly it lifted the brass eyelids
and sap began to flow from it, from Buddha. Sap also from the yellow
dress. Even in the mirror,--drops of sap, and from the large bed
and from the children's bed and soon from myself.... It is horror,
mortally sweet horror!...

I woke up. Soft blue light, the glass of the walls, of the chairs,
of the table was glimmering. This calmed me. My heart stopped
palpitating. Sap! Buddha! How absurd! I am sick, it is clear; I
never saw dreams before. They say that to see dreams was a common
normal thing with the ancients. Yes, after all, their life was a
whirling carousel: green, orange, Buddha, sap,--but we, people
of today, we know all too well that dreaming is a serious mental
disease. I.... Is it possible that _my_ brain, this precise, clean,
glittering mechanism, like a chronometer without a speck of dust on
it, is...? Yes it is, now. I really feel there in the brain some
foreign body like an eyelash in the eye. One does not feel one's
whole body but this eye with a hair in it, one cannot forget it for
a second....

The cheerful, crystalline sound of the bell at my head. Seven
o'clock. Time to get up. To the right and to the left as in mirrors,
to the right and to the left through the glass walls I see others
like myself, other rooms like my own, other clothes like my own,
movements like mine, duplicated thousands of times. This invigorates
me; I see myself as a part of an enormous, vigorous, united body;
and what precise beauty! Not a single superfluous gesture, or bow,
or turn. Yes, this Taylor was undoubtedly the greatest genius of the
ancients. True, he did not come to the idea of applying his method
to the whole life, to every step throughout the twenty-four hours of
the day; he was unable to integrate his system from one o'clock to
twenty-four. I cannot understand the ancients. How could they write
whole libraries about some Kant and take notice only slightly of
Taylor, of this prophet who saw ten centuries ahead?

Breakfast was over. The hymn of the United State had been
harmoniously sung; rhythmically, four abreast we walked to
the elevators, the motors buzzed faintly and swiftly we went
down--down--down, the heart sinking slightly. Again that stupid
dream or some unknown function of that dream. Oh, yes! Yesterday in
the aero, then down--down! Well, it is all over, anyhow. Period. It
is very fortunate that I was so firm and brusque with her.

The car of the underground railway carried me swiftly to the place
where the motionless, beautiful body of the _Integral_, not yet
spiritualized by fire, was glittering in the docks in the sunshine.
With closed eyes I dreamed in formulae. Again I calculated in
my mind what was the initial velocity required to tear away the
_Integral_ from the earth. Every second the mass of the _Integral_
would change because of the expenditure of the explosive fuel. The
equation was very complex with transcendant figures. As in a dream
I felt, right here in the firm calculated world, how someone sat
down at my side, barely touching me and saying, "Pardon." I opened
my eyes. At first, apparently because of an association with the
_Integral_, I saw something impetuously flying into the distance: a
head; I saw pink wing-ears sticking out on the sides of it, then the
curve of the overhanging back of the head, the double-curved letter
S.

Through the glass walls of my algebraic world, again I felt the
eyelash in my eye. I felt something disagreeable, I felt that today
I must....

"Certainly, please,"--I smiled at my neighbor and bowed.

Number S-4711 I saw glittering on his golden badge (that is why I
associated him with the letter S from the very first moment: an
optical impression which remained unregistered by consciousness).
His eyes sparkled, two sharp little drills; they were revolving
swiftly, drilling in deeper and deeper. It seemed that in a moment
they would drill in to the bottom and would see something that I do
not even dare to confess to myself....

That bothersome eyelash became wholly clear to me. S- was one of
them, one of the Guardians, and it would be the simplest thing
immediately, without deferring to tell him everything!

"I went yesterday to the Ancient House ..." my voice was strange,
husky, flat,--I tried to cough.

"That is good. It must have given you material for some instructive
deductions."

"Yes ... but ... You see, I was not alone; I was in the company of
I-330, and then...."

"I-330? You are fortunate. She is a very interesting, gifted woman;
she has a host of admirers."

But he too--then during the promenade.... Perhaps he is even
assigned as her he-Number! No, it is impossible to tell him,
unthinkable. This was perfectly clear.

"Yes, yes, certainly, very," I smiled, broader and broader, more
stupidly, and felt as if my smile made me look foolish, naked.

The drills reached the bottom; revolving continually they screwed
themselves back into his eyes. S- smiled double-curvedly, nodded and
slid to the exit.

I covered my face with the newspaper (I felt as if everybody were
looking at me), and soon I forgot about the eyelash, about the
little drills, about everything, I was so upset by what I read
in the paper: "According to authentic information, traces of an
organization which still remains out of reach, have again been
discovered. This organization aims at liberation from the beneficial
yoke of the State."

Liberation! It is remarkable how persistent human criminal instincts
are! I use deliberately the word "criminal," for freedom and crime
are as closely related as--well, as the movement of an aero and its
speed: if the speed of an aero equals zero, the aero is motionless;
if human liberty is equal to zero, man does not commit any crime.
That is clear. The way to rid man of criminality is to rid him of
freedom. No sooner did we rid ourselves of freedom (in the cosmic
sense centuries are only a "no sooner"), than suddenly some unknown
pitiful degenerates.... No, I cannot understand why I did not go
immediately yesterday to the Bureau of the Guardians. Today, after
sixteen o'clock, I shall go there without fail.

At sixteen-ten I was in the street; at once I noticed O-90 at the
corner; she was all rosy with delight at the encounter. She has a
simple, round mind. A timely meeting; she would understand and lend
me support. Or, ... no, I did not need any support; my decision was
firm.

The pipes of the Musical Tower thundered out harmoniously the
March--the same daily March. How wonderful the charm of this
dailiness, of this constant repetition and mirror-like smoothness!

"Out for a walk?" Her round blue eyes opened toward me widely, blue
windows leading inside; I penetrate there unhindered; there is
nothing in there, I mean nothing foreign, nothing superfluous.

"No, not for a walk. I must go." I told her where. And to my
astonishment I saw her rosy round mouth form a crescent with the
horns downward as if she tasted something sour. This angered me.

"You she-Numbers seem to be incurably eaten up by prejudices. You
are absolutely unable to think abstractly. Forgive me the word but
this I call bluntness of mind."

"You? ... to the spies? How ugly! And I went to the Botanical Garden
and brought you a branch of lily-of-the-valley...."

"Why, 'and I'? Why this 'and'? Just like a woman!"

Angrily (this I must confess), I snatched the flowers. "Here they
are, your lilies-of-the-valley. Well, smell them! Good? Yes? Why not
use a little bit of logic? The lilies-of-the-valley smell good; all
right! But you cannot say about an odor, about the conception of an
odor, that it _is_ good or bad, can you? You can't, can you? There
is the smell of lilies-of-the-valley and there is the disagreeable
smell of henbane. Both are odors. The ancient States had their
spies; we have ours ... yes, spies! I am not afraid of words. But
is it not clear to you that there the spies were henbane; here they
are lilies-of-the-valley? Yes, lilies-of-the-valley, yes!"

The rosy crescent quivered. Now I understand that it was only my
impression but at that moment I was certain she was going to laugh.
I shouted still louder:

"Yes, lilies-of-the-valley! And there is nothing funny about it,
nothing funny!"

The smooth round globes of heads passing by were turning towards us.
O-90 gently took my hand.

"You are so strange today ... are you ill?"

My dream.... Yellow color.... Buddha.... It was at once born clearly
upon me that I must go to the Medical Bureau.

"Yes, you are right, I am sick," I said with joy (that seems to
me an inexplicable contradiction; there was nothing to be joyful
about).

"You must go at once to the doctor. You understand that; you are
obliged to be healthy; it seems strange to have to prove it to you."

"My dear O-, of course you are right. Absolutely right."

I did not go to the Bureau of the Guardians; I could not; I had
to go to the Medical Bureau; they kept me there until seventeen
o'clock.

In the evening (incidentally, the Bureau of Guardians is closed
evenings)--in the evening O- came to see me. The curtains were not
lowered. We busied ourselves with the arithmetical problems of an
ancient text-book. This occupation always calms and purifies our
thoughts. O- sat over her note book, her head slightly inclined
to the left; she was so assiduous that she poked out her left
cheek with the tongue from within. She looked so child-like, so
charming.... I felt everything in me was pleasant, precise and
simple.

She left. I remained alone. I breathed deeply two times (it is
very good exercise before retiring for the night). Suddenly,--an
unexpected odor reminiscent of something very disagreeable! I soon
found out what was the matter: a branch of lily-of-the-valley
was hidden in my bed. Immediately everything was aroused again,
came up from the bottom. Decidedly, it was tactless on her part
surreptitiously to put these lilies-of-the-valley there. Well, true
I did not go; I didn't, but was it my fault that I felt indisposed?




RECORD EIGHT

  An Irrational Root
  R-13
  The Triangle


It was long ago during my school-days, when I first encountered the
square-root of minus one. I remember it all very clearly; a bright
globe-like class hall, about a hundred round heads of children
and Plappa--our mathematician. We nicknamed him Plappa; it was
a very much used-up mathematician, loosely screwed together; as
the member of the class who was on duty that day would be putting
the plug into the socket behind we would hear at first from the
megaphone, "Plap-plap-plap-plap--tshshsh...." Only then the lesson
would follow. One day Plappa told us about irrational numbers, and
I remember I wept and banged the table with my fist and cried, "I
do not want that square-root of minus one; take that square-root
of minus one away!" This irrational root grew into me as something
strange, foreign, terrible; it tortured me; it could not be thought
out. It could not be defeated because it was beyond reason.

Now that square-root of minus one is here again. I read over what
I have written and I clearly see that I was insincere with myself,
that I lied to myself in order to avoid seeing that square-root of
minus one. My sickness, etc., is all nonsense; _I could go there_. I
feel sure that if such a thing had happened a week ago I should have
gone without hesitating. Why then am I unable to go now?... Why?

Today, for instance, at exactly sixteen-ten I stood before the
glittering Glass Wall. Above was the shining, golden, sun-like sign:
"Bureau of Guardians." Inside, a long queue of bluish-gray unifs
awaiting their turns, faces shining like the oil lamps in an ancient
temple. They came to accomplish a great thing: they came to put on
the altar of the United State their beloved ones, their friends,
their own selves. My whole being craved to join them, yet ... I
could not; my feet were as though melted into the glass plates of
the sidewalk. I simply stood there looking foolish.

"Heh, mathematician! Dreaming?"

I shivered. Black eyes varnished with laughter looked at me,--thick
negro lips! It was my old friend the poet, R-13, and with him rosy
O-. I turned around angrily (I still believe that if they had
not appeared I should have entered the Bureau and have torn the
square-root of minus one out of my flesh).

"Not dreaming at all; if you will, 'standing in adoration'," I
retorted quite brusquely.

"Oh, certainly, certainly! You, my friend, should never have become
a mathematician; you should have become a poet, a great poet! Yes,
come over to our trade, to the poets. Heh? If you will, I can
arrange it in a jiffy. Heh?"

R-13 usually talks very fast: His words run in torrents, his thick
lips sprinkle. Every P is a fountain, every "poets" a fountain.

"So far I have served knowledge, and I shall continue to serve
knowledge."

I frowned. I do not like, I do not understand jokes, and R-13 has
the bad habit of joking.

"Heh, to the deuce with knowledge. Your much-heralded knowledge is
but a form of cowardice. It is a fact! Yes, you want to encircle the
infinite with a wall and you fear to cast a glance behind the wall.
Yes, sir! And if ever you should glance beyond the wall you would be
dazzled and close your eyes,--yes,--"

"Walls are the foundation of every human--" I began.

R-13 sprinkled his fountain. O- laughed rosily and roundly. I
waved my hand: "Well, you may laugh, I don't care." I was busy
with something else. I had to find a way of eating up, of crushing
down, that square-root of minus one. "Suppose," I offered, "we go
to my place and do some arithmetical problems." (The quiet hour of
yesterday afternoon came to my memory; perhaps today also....)

O- glanced at R-, then serenely and roundly at me; the soft,
endearing color of our pink checks came to her cheeks.

"But today I am.... I have a check to him today." (A glance at R-.)
"And tonight he is busy, so that--"

The moist varnished lips whispered good-naturedly: "Half an hour
is plenty for us, is it not, O-? I am not a great lover of your
problems; let us simply go over to my place and chat."

I was afraid to remain alone with myself, or to be more correct,
with that new strange self, who by some curious coincidence bore
my number, D-503. So I went with R-. True, he is not precise,
not rhythmic, his logic is jocular and turned inside out, yet we
are.... Three years ago we both chose our dear, rosy O-. This tied
our friendship more firmly together than our school-days did. In
R-'s room everything seems like mine; the Tables, the glass of the
chairs, the table, the closet, the bed. But as we entered, R- moved
one chair out of place, then another,--the room became confused,
everything lost the established order and seemed to violate every
rule of Euclid's geometry. R- remained the same as before; in Taylor
and in mathematics he always lagged at the tail of the class.

We recalled Plappa, how we boys used to paste the whole surface
of his glass legs with paper notes expressing our thanks (we all
loved Plappa). We recalled our priest (it goes without saying that
we were taught not the "law" of ancient religion but the law of
the United State). Our priest had a very powerful voice; a real
hurricane would come out of the megaphone. And we children would
yell the prescribed texts after him with all our lung-power. We
recalled how our scapegrace, R-13, used to stuff the priest with
chewed paper; every word was thus accompanied by a paper wad shot
out. Naturally, R- was punished, for what he did was undoubtedly
wrong, but now we laughed heartily;--by we I mean our triangle, R-,
O-, and I, I must confess, I too.

"And what if he had been a living one? Like the ancient ones, heh?"
We'd have b... b..., a fountain running from the fat bubbling lips.
The sun was shining through the ceiling, the sun above, the sun from
the sides, its reflection from below. O- on R-13's lap and minute
drops of sunlight in O-'s blue eyes. Somehow my heart warmed up. The
square-root of minus one became silent and motionless....

"Well, how is your _Integral_? Will you soon hop off to enlighten
the inhabitants of the planets? You'd better hurry up, my boy, or
we poets will have produced such a devilish lot that even your
_Integral_ will be unable to lift the cargo. 'Every day from eight
to eleven' ..." R- wagged his head and scratched the back of it.
The back of his head is square; it looks like a little valise (I
recalled for some reason an ancient painting "In the Cab"). I felt
more lively.

"You too are writing for the _Integral_? Tell me about it. What are
you writing about? What did you write today, for instance?"

"Today I did not write; today I was busy with something else."
"B-b-busy" sprinkled straight into my face.

"What else?"

R- frowned. "What? What? Well, if you insist I'll tell you. I was
busy with the Death Sentence. I was putting the Death Sentence into
verse. An idiot--and to be frank, one of our poets.... For two
years we all lived side by side with him and nothing seemed wrong.
Suddenly he went crazy. 'I,' said he, 'am a genius! And I am above
the law.' All that sort of nonsense.... But it is not a thing to
talk about."

The fat lips hung down. The varnish disappeared from the eyes. He
jumped up, turned around and stared through the wall. I looked at
his tightly closed little "valise" and thought, "What is he handling
in his little valise now?"

A moment of awkward asymmetric silence. I could not see clearly what
was the matter but I was certain there was something....

"Fortunately the antediluvian time of those Shakespeares and
Dostoyevskis (or what were their names?) is past," I said in a voice
deliberately loud.

R- turned his face to me. Words sprinkled and bubbled out of him as
before, but I thought I noticed there was no more joyful varnish to
his eyes.

"Yes, dear mathematician, fortunately, fortunately. We are the happy
arithmetical mean. As you would put it, the integration from zero to
infinity, from imbeciles to Shakespeare. Do I put it right?"

I do not know why (it seemed to me absolutely uncalled for) I
recalled suddenly the other one, _her_ tone. A thin invisible
thread stretched between her and R- (what thread?). The square-root
of minus one began to bother me again. I glanced at my badge;
sixteen-twenty-five o'clock! They had only thirty-five minutes for
the use of the pink check.

"Well, I must go." I kissed O-, shook hands with R- and went to the
elevator.

As I crossed the avenue I turned around. Here and there in the
huge mass of glass penetrated by sunshine there were grayish-blue
squares, the opaque squares of lowered curtains,--the squares of
rhythmic, Taylorized happiness. On the seventh floor I found R-13's
square. The curtains were already lowered.

Dear O-.... Dear R-.... He also has (I do not know why I write this
"also," but I write as it comes from my pen), he too has something
which is not entirely clear in him. Yet I, he and O-, we are a
triangle; I confess, not an isosceles triangle but a triangle
nevertheless. We, to speak in the language of our ancestors (perhaps
to you, my planetary readers, this is the more comprehensible
language) we are a family. And one feels so good at times, when one
is able for a short while, at least, to close oneself within a firm
triangle, to close oneself away from anything that....




RECORD NINE

  Liturgy
  Iambus
  The Cast-Iron Hand


A solemn bright day. On such days one forgets one's weaknesses,
inexactitudes, illnesses, and everything is crystalline and
imperturbable like our new glass....

The Plaza of the Cube. Sixty-six imposing concentric circles--stands.
Sixty-six rows of quiet serene faces. Eyes reflecting the shining
of the sky,--or perhaps it is the shining of the United State.
Red like blood, are the flowers--the lips of the women. Like soft
garlands the faces of the children in the first rows, nearest the
place of action. Profound, austere, gothic silence.

To judge by the descriptions which reach us from the ancients,
they felt somewhat like this during their "Church services," but
they served their nonsensical unknown god; we serve our rational
god, whom we most thoroughly know. Their god gave them nothing but
eternal, torturing seeking; our god gives us absolute truth, that
is, he has rid us of any kind of doubt. Their god did not invent
anything cleverer than sacrificing oneself, nobody knows what for;
we bring to our god, The United State, a quiet, rational, carefully
thought-out sacrifice.

Yes, it was a solemn liturgy for the United State, a reminiscence of
the great days, years, of the Two Hundred Years' War,--a magnificent
celebration of the victory of _all_ over _one_, of the _sum_ over
the individual!

That _one_ stood on the steps of the Cube which was filled with
sunlight. A white, no not even white, but already colorless glass
face, lips of glass. And only the eyes--thirsty, swallowing, black
holes leading into that dreadful world from which he was only a few
minutes away. The golden badge with the number already had been
taken off. His hands were tied with a red ribbon. (A symbol of
ancient custom. The explanation of it is that in the old times when
this sort of thing was not done in the name of the United State, the
convicted naturally considered that they had the right to resist,
hence their hands were usually bound with chains.)

On the top of the Cube, next to the Machine, the motionless,
metallic figure of him whom we call the Well-Doer. One could not see
his face from below. All one could see was that it was bounded by
austere, magnificent, square lines. And his hands.... Did you ever
notice how sometimes in a photograph the hands, if they were too
near the camera, come out enormous? They then compel your attention,
overshadow everything else. Those hands of his, heavy hands, quiet
for the time being, were stony hands,--it seemed the knees on which
they rested must have had pains to bear their weight.

Suddenly one of those hands rose slowly. A slow cast-iron gesture;
obeying the will of the lifted hand, a Number came out on the
platform. It was one of the State poets, whose fortunate lot it was
to crown our celebration with his verses.

Divine iambic brass verses thundered over the many stands. They
dealt with the man, who, his reason lost and lips like glass, stood
on the steps and waited for the logical consequences of his own
insane deeds.

... A blaze.... Buildings were swaying in those iambic lines, and
sprinkling upward their liquified golden substance, they broke and
fell. The green trees were scorched, their sap slowly ran out and
they remained standing like black crosses, like skeletons. Then
appeared Prometheus (that meant _us_).

  "... he harnessed fire
  With machines and steel
  And fettered chaos with Law...."

The world was renovated; it became like steel,--a sun of steel,
trees of steel, men of steel. Suddenly an insane man, "Unchained
the fire and set it free," and again the world had perished....
Unfortunately I have a bad memory for poetry, but one thing I am
sure of: one could not choose more instructive or more beautiful
parables.

Another slow, heavy gesture of the cast-iron hand and another poet
appeared on the steps of the Cube. I stood up! Impossible! But ...
thick negro lips,--it _was_ he. Why did he not tell me that he was
to be invested with such high.... His lips trembled; they were gray.
Oh, I certainly understood; to be face to face with the Well-Doer,
face to face with the hosts of Guardians! Yet one should not allow
oneself to be so upset.

Swift sharp verses like an axe.... They told about an unheard-of
crime, about sacrilegious poems in which the Well-Doer was
called.... But no, I do not dare to repeat....

R-13 was pale when he finished, and looking at no one (I did not
expect such bashfulness of him) he descended and sat down. For
an infinitesimal fraction of a second I saw right beside him
somebody's face--a sharp, black triangle--and instantly I lost it;
my eyes, thousands of eyes, were directed upward toward the Machine.
Then--again the superhuman, cast-iron, gesture of the hand.

Swayed by an unknown wind the criminal moved; one step ... one more,
... then the last step in his life. His face was turned to the sky,
his head thrown backward--he was on his last.-- ... Heavy, stony
like fate, the Well-Doer went around the machine, put his enormous
hand on the lever.... Not a whisper, not a breath around; all eyes
were upon that hand.... What crushing, scorching power one must feel
to be the tool, to be the resultant of hundreds of thousands of
wills! How great his lot!

Another second. The hand moved down, switching in the current. The
lightning-sharp blade of the electric ray.... A faint crack like
a shiver, in the tubes of the Machine.... The prone body, covered
with a light phosphorescent smoke; then suddenly, under the eyes of
all, it began to melt,--to melt, to dissolve with terrible speed.
And then nothing; just a pool of chemically pure water which only a
moment ago was so red and pulsated in his heart....

All this was simple; all of us were familiar with the phenomenon,
dissociation of matter,--yes, the splitting of the atoms of the
human body! Yet every time we witnessed it, it seemed a miracle; it
was a symbol of the superhuman power of the Well-Doer.

Above, in front of Him, the burning faces of the female numbers,
mouths half open from emotion, flowers swaying in the wind.[2]
According to custom, ten women were covering with flowers the
unif of the Well-Doer, which was still wet with spray. With the
magnificent step of a supreme priest He slowly descended, slowly
passed between the rows of stands; and like tender white branches
there rose toward Him the arms of the women; and, millions like
one, our tempestuous cheers! Then cheers in honor of the Guardians,
who all unseen, were present among us.... Who knows, perhaps the
fancy of the ancient man foresaw them centuries ahead, when he
created the gentle and formidable "guardian-angels" assigned to each
one from the day of his birth?

[2] These flowers naturally were brought from the Botanical Museum.
I, personally, am unable to see anything beautiful in flowers, or
in anything else that belongs to the lower kingdom which now exists
only beyond the Green Wall. Only rational and useful things are
beautiful: machines, boots, formulae, food, etc.

Yes, there was in our celebration something of the ancient
religions, something purifying like a storm.... You whose lot it may
be to read this, are you familiar with such emotions? I am sorry for
you if you are not.




RECORD TEN

  A Letter
  A Manhunt
  Hairy I


Yesterday was for me a kind of filter-paper which chemists use for
filtering their solutions (all suspended and superfluous particles
remain on the paper). This morning I went downstairs all purified
and distilled, transparent.

Downstairs in the hall the controller sat at a small table,
constantly looking at her watch and recording the Numbers who were
leaving. Her name is U- ... well, I prefer not to give her Number,
for I fear I may not write kindly about her. Although, as a matter
of fact, she is a very respectable, mature woman. The only thing I
do not like in her is that her cheeks fold down a little like gills
of a fish (although I do not see anything wrong in this appearance).
She scratched with her pen and I saw on the page "D-503"--and
suddenly, splash! an ink-blot. No sooner did I open my mouth to call
her attention to that, than she raised her head and blotted me with
an inky smile. "There is a letter for you. You will receive it,
dear. Yes, yes, you will."

I knew a letter, after she had read it, must go through the Bureau
of the Guardians (I think it is unnecessary to explain in detail
this natural order of things); I would receive it not later than
twelve o'clock. But that tiny smile confused me; the drop of ink
clouded the transparency of the distilled solution. At the dock of
the _Integral_ I could not concentrate; I even made a mistake in my
calculations,--that never happened to me before.

At twelve o'clock, again the rosy-brown fish-gills' smile, and at
last the letter was in my hands. I cannot say why I did not read
it right there, but I put it in my pocket and ran into my room.
I opened it and glanced it over and ... and sat down. It was the
official notification advising me that Number I-330 had had me
assigned to her and that today at twenty-one o'clock, I was to go to
her. Her address was given.

"No! After all that happened! After I showed her frankly my attitude
toward her! Besides, how could she know that I did not go to the
Bureau of the Guardians? She had no way of knowing that I was ill
and could not.... And despite all this...."

A dynamo was whirling and buzzing in my head. Buddha ... yellow
... lilies-of-the-valley ... rosy crescent.... Besides,--besides,
O- wanted to come to see me today! I am sure she would not believe
(how could one believe), that I had absolutely nothing to do with
the matter, that ... I am sure also that we (O- and I) will have
a difficult, foolish and absolutely illogical conversation. No,
anything but that! Let the situation solve itself mechanically; I
shall send her a copy of this official communication.

While I was hastily putting the paper in my pocket, I noticed my
terrible ape-like hand. I remembered how that day during our walk,
she took my hand and looked at it. Is it possible that she really
... that she....

A quarter to twenty-one. A white northern night. Everything was
glass,--greenish. But it was a different kind of glass, not like
ours, not genuine but very breakable,--a thin glass shell and within
that shell things were flying, whirling, buzzing. I should not have
been surprised if suddenly the cupola of the auditorium had risen in
slow, rolling clouds of smoke; or if the ripe moon had sent an inky
smile,--like that one at the little table this morning; or if in all
the houses suddenly all the curtains had been lowered and behind the
curtains....

I felt something peculiar; my ribs were like iron bars that
interfered, decidedly interfered, with my heart, giving it too
little space. I stood at a glass door on which were the golden
letters _I-330_; I-330 sat at the table with her back to me; she was
writing something. I stepped in.

"Here...." I held out the pink check, "... I received the
notification this noon and here I am!"

"How punctual you are! Just a minute please, may I? Sit down. I
shall finish in a minute."

She lowered her eyes to the letter. What had she there, behind her
lowered curtains? What would she say? What would she do in a second?
How to learn it? How to calculate it, since she comes from beyond,
from the wild ancient land of dreams? I looked at her in silence.
My ribs were iron bars. The space for the heart was too small....
When she speaks her face is like a swiftly revolving, glittering
wheel; you cannot see the separate bars. But at that moment the
wheel was motionless. I saw a strange combination: dark eyebrows
running right to the temples--a sharp, mocking triangle; and still
another dark triangle with its apex upward--two deep wrinkles from
the nose to the angles of the mouth. And these two triangles somehow
contradicted each other. They gave the whole face that disagreeable,
irritating X, or cross; a face obliquely marked by a cross.

The wheel started to turn; its bars blurred.

"So you did not go to the Bureau of Guardians after all?"

"I did ... I did not feel well ... I could not."

"Yes? I thought so; something _must_ have prevented you, matters
little what (sharp teeth--a smile). But now you are in my hands. You
remember: 'Any Number who within forty-eight hours fails to report
to the Bureau is considered....'"

My heart banged so forcibly that the iron bars bent. If I were
not sitting ... like a little boy, how stupid! I was caught like
a little boy and stupidly I kept silent. I felt I was in a net;
neither my legs nor my arms....

She stood up and stretched herself lazily. She pressed the button
and the curtains on all four walls fell with a slight rustle. I was
cut off from the rest of the world, alone with her.

She was somewhere behind me, near the closet door. The unif
was rustling, falling. I was listening, _all_ listening. I
remembered,--no, it glistened in my mind for one hundredth of a
second,--I once had to calculate the curve of a street membrane
of a new type. (These membranes are handsomely decorated and are
placed on all the avenues, registering all street conversations for
the Bureau of Guardians.) I remembered a rosy concave, trembling
membrane,--a strange being consisting of one organ only, an ear. I
was at that moment such a membrane.

Now the "click" of the snap-button at her collar, at her breast, and
... lower. The glassy silk rustled over her shoulders and knees,
over the floor. I heard--and this was clearer than actual seeing--I
heard how one foot stepped out of the grayish-blue heap of silk,
then the other.... Soon I'd hear the creak of the bed and ...

The tensely stretched membrane trembled and registered the
silence,--no, the sharp hammer-like blows of the heart against the
iron bars and endless pauses between beats. And I heard, saw, how
she, behind me hesitated for a second, thinking. The door of the
closet.... It slammed; again silk ... silk....

"Well, all right."

I turned around. She was dressed in a saffron-yellow dress of an
ancient style. This was a thousand times worse than if she had not
been dressed at all. Two sharp points, through the thin tissue
glowing with rosiness, two burning embers piercing through ashes;
two tender, round knees....

She was sitting in a low armchair. In front of her on a small square
table, I noticed a bottle filled with something poisonously green
and two small glasses on thin legs. In the corner of her mouth she
had a very thin paper tube; she was ejecting smoke formed by the
burning of that ancient smoking substance whose name I do not now
remember.

The membrane was still vibrating. Within the sledge-hammer was
pounding the red-hot iron bars of my chest. I heard distinctly every
blow of the hammer, and ... what if she too heard it?

But she continued to produce smoke very calmly; calmly she looked at
me; and nonchalantly she flicked ashes on the pink check!

With as much self-control as possible I asked, "If you still feel
that way, why did you have me assigned to you? And why did you make
me come here?"

As if she had not heard at all, she poured some of the green liquid
from the bottle into a small glass and sipped it.

"Wonderful liqueur! Want some?"

Then I understood; alcohol! Like lightning there came to memory what
I saw yesterday: the stony hand of the Well-Doer, the unbearable
blade of the electric ray; there on the Cube, the head thrown
backward, the stretched-out body! I shivered.

"Please listen," I said, "You know, do you not, that any one who
poisons himself with nicotine, more particularly with alcohol, is
severely treated by the United State?"

Dark brows raised high to the temples, the sharp mocking triangle.

"'It is more reasonable to annihilate a few than to allow many to
poison themselves.... And degeneration,' ... etc.... This is true to
the point of indecency."

"Indecency?"

"Yes. To let out into the street such a group of bald-headed naked
little truths. Only imagine please. Imagine, say, that persistent
admirer of mine, S-, well, you know him. Then imagine: if he should
discard the deception of clothes and appear in public in his true
form ... oh!" She laughed. But I clearly saw her lower, sorrowful
triangle; two deep grooves from the nose to the mouth. And for
some reason these grooves made me think: that double-curved being,
half-hunched, with wing-like ears,--he embraced her? her, such ...
Oh!

Naturally, I try now merely to express my abnormal feelings of that
moment. Now, as I write, I understand perfectly that all this is as
it should be; that he, S-4711, like any other honest Number has a
perfect right to the joys of life and that it would be unjust....
But I think the point is quite clear.

I-330 laughed a long, strange laugh. Then she cast a look at me,
into me.

"The most curious thing is that I am not in the least afraid of you.
You are such a dear, I am sure of it! You would never think of going
to the Bureau and reporting that I drink liqueurs and smoke. You
will be sick or busy, or I don't know what.... Furthermore, I am
sure you will drink this charming poison with me."

What an impertinent, mocking tone! I felt definitely that in a
moment I should hate her. (Why in a moment? In fact I hated her all
the time.)

I-330 turned over the little glass of green poison straight into
her mouth. Then she stood up, and all rosy through the translucent
saffron-yellow tissue, she made a few steps and stopped behind my
chair.... Suddenly her arms were about my neck ... her lips grew
into mine, no, even somewhere much deeper, much more terribly.... I
swear all this was very unexpected for me. That is why perhaps ...
for I could not (at this moment I see clearly) I could not myself
have the desire to....

Unbearably sweet lips. (I suppose it was the taste of the liqueur.)
It was as though burning poison were being poured into me, and more
and more....

I tore away from the earth and began revolving as an independent
planet,--down--down--following an uncalculable curve....

What happened next I am able to describe only in an approximate way,
only by way of more or less corresponding analogies.

It never occurred to me before but it is true: we who live on the
earth, we are always walking over a seething red sea of fire which
is hidden in the womb of the earth. We never think of it. But
imagine the ground under our feet suddenly transformed into a thin
glass shell; suddenly we should behold...!

I became glass-like and saw within myself. There were two selves in
me. One, the former D-503, Number D-503; and the other.... Before,
that other used only to show his hairy paws from time to time, but
now the whole other self left his shell. That shell was breaking,
and in a moment....

Grasping with all my strength the last straw (the arms of the
chair), I asked loudly (so as to hear my first self), "Where, where
did you get this poison?"

"Oh, this? A physician, one of my...."

"'One of my! one of my' what?" And my other self jumped up suddenly
and yelled: "I won't allow it! I want no one but me.... I shall
kill any one who.... Because I.... You." ... I saw my other self
grasp her rudely with his hairy paws, tear the silk, and put his
teeth in her flesh!... I remember exactly, his teeth!...

I do not remember how, but I-330 slipped away and I saw her
straightened, her head raised high, her eyes overlain by that cursed
impenetrable curtain. She stood leaning with her back against the
closet door and listening to me.

I remember I was on the floor; I embraced her limbs, kissed her
knees and cried supplicatingly, "At once, right away, right away."

Sharp teeth.... The sharp mocking triangle of the brows.... She bent
over and in silence unbuttoned my badge.

"Yes, yes, dear--dear."

I began hastily to remove my unif. But I-330, silent as before,
lifted my badge to my eyes, showing me the clock upon it. It was
twenty-two-twenty-five.

I became cold. I knew what it meant to be out in the street after
twenty-two-thirty. My insanity disappeared at once. I was again
I. I saw clearly one thing: I hated her, hated her, hated-- ...
Without saying good-bye, without looking back, I ran out of the
room. Hurriedly trying to fasten the badge back in its place, I
ran down the stairs (I was afraid lest some one notice me in the
elevator), and jumped out into a deserted street.

Everything was in its place; life so simple, ordinary, orderly.
Glittering glass houses, pale glass sky, a greenish, motionless
night. But under that cool glass something wild, something red
and hairy, was silently seething. I was gasping for breath but I
continued to run, so as not to be late.

Suddenly I felt that my badge which I had hurriedly pinned on, was
detaching itself; it came off and fell to the sidewalk. I bent
over to pick it up and in the momentary silence I heard somebody's
steps. I turned. Someone small and hunched was disappearing around
the corner. At least so it seemed. I started to run as fast as I
could. The wind whistled in my ears. At the entrance of my house I
stopped and looked at the clock; one minute to twenty-two-thirty! I
listened; nobody behind. It was my foolish imagination, the effect
of the poison.

The night was full of torture. My bed seemed to lift itself under
me, then to fall again, then up again! I used autosuggestion: "At
night all the Numbers must sleep; sleeping at night is a duty just
like working during the day. To sleep at night is necessary for the
next day's work. Not to sleep at night is criminal." Yet I could
not sleep--I could not. I was perishing! I was unable to fulfill my
duties to the United State! I....




RECORD ELEVEN

No, I Can't; Let It Be without Headings!


Evening. It is somewhat foggy. The sky is covered with a
milky-golden tissue, and one cannot see what is there, beyond,
on the heights. The ancients "knew" that the greatest, bored
skeptic--their God, lived there. We know that crystalline, blue,
naked, indecent Nothing is there. _I_ do not know any more what
_is_ there. I have learned too many things of late. Knowledge,
self-confident knowledge which is sure that it is faultless, is
faith. I had firm faith in myself; I believed that I knew all about
myself. But then.... I look in the mirror. And for the first time
in my life, yes, _for the first time in my life_, I see clearly,
precisely, consciously and with surprise, I see myself as some
"him!" I am "he." Frowning, black, straight brows; between them
like a scar, there is a vertical wrinkle. (Was there that wrinkle
before?) Steel gray eyes encircled by the shadow of a sleepless
night. And behind that steel ... I understand; I never before knew
what there was behind that steel. From there (this "there" is at
once so near and so infinitely distant!) I look at myself--at "him."
And I know surely that "he" with his straight brows is a stranger,
that I meet him here for the first time in my life. The real I is
_not_ he.

No. Period. All this is nonsense. And all these foolish emotions are
only delirium, the result of last night's poisoning.... Poisoning
with what? With a sip of that green poison or with her? It matters
little. I write all this merely in order to demonstrate how
strangely the precise and sharp human reason may become confused.
This reason, strong enough to make infinity which the ancients
feared so much, understandable by means of.... The switch buzzes,
"Number R-13." Well, I am even glad; alone I should....

_Twenty minutes later_:

On the plane of this paper, in a world of two dimensions, these
lines follow each other, but in another world they.... I am losing
the sense for figures.... Twenty minutes! Perhaps two hundred or two
hundred thousand!...

It seems so strange, quietly, deliberately, measuring every word,
to write down my adventure with R-. Imagine yourself sitting down
at your own bed, crossing your legs, watching curiously how you
yourself shrivel in the very same bed. My mental state is similar to
that.

When R-13 came in I was perfectly quiet and normal. I began with
sincere admiration to tell him how wonderfully he succeeded in
versifying the death sentence of that insane man, and that his
poem more than anything else had smothered and annihilated the
transgressor of the law.

"More than that," I said, "if I were ordered to prepare a
mathematical draught of the Machine of the Well-Doer, I should
undoubtedly,--undoubtedly, put on that draught some of your
verses!"--Suddenly I saw R-'s eyes becoming more and more opaque,
his lips acquiring a gray tint.

"What is the matter?"

"What?--Well.... Merely that I am dead sick of it; everybody keeps
on: 'the death-sentence, the death-sentence!' I want to hear no more
of it! You understand? I do not want...." He became serious, rubbing
his neck--that little valise filled with luggage which I cannot
understand. A silence. There! He found something in that little
valise of his, removed it, unwrapped it, spread it out; his eyes
became covered with the varnish of laughter. He began:

"I am writing something for your _Integral_. Yes.... I am!" He was
himself again; bubbling, sprinkling lips; words splashing like a
fountain.

"You see, it is the ancient legend of paradise." ("p" like a
fountain.) "That legend referred to us of today, did it not? Yes.
Only think of it, think of it a moment! There were two in paradise
and the choice was offered to them: happiness without freedom, or
freedom without happiness. No other choice. _Tertium non datur_.
They, fools that they were, chose freedom. Naturally, they longed
for centuries afterwards for fetters, for the fetters of yore.
This was the meaning of their world-weariness, _Weltschmerz_. For
centuries! And only we found a way to regain happiness.... No,
listen, follow me! The ancient god and we, side by side at the
same table! Yes, we helped god definitely and finally to defeat
the devil. It was he, the devil, who lead people to transgression,
to taste pernicious freedom, he the cunning serpent? And we came
along, planted a boot on his head and ... squash! Done with him!
Paradise again! We returned to the simple-mindedness and innocence
of Adam and Eve. No more meddling with good and evil and all
that; everything is simple again, heavenly, childishly simple!
The Well-Doer, The Machine, The Cube, the giant Gas Bell, The
Guardians,--all these are good. All this is magnificent, beautiful,
noble, lofty, crystalline, pure. For all this preserves our
non-freedom, that is, our happiness. In our place those ancients
would indulge in discussions, deliberations, etc. They would break
their heads trying to make out what was moral or unmoral. But we....
Well, in short, these are the highlights of my little paradise
poem. What do you think of it? And above all the style is most
solemn, pious. Understand me? Nice little idea, is it not? Do you
understand?"

Of course I understood. I remember my thoughts at that moment: "his
appearance is nonsensical and lacking in symmetry, yet what an
orderly-working mind he has!" This made him dear to me, that is to
the real _me_. (I still insist that _I_ of before is the real one;
my I of late is, certainly, only an illness.)

Apparently R- read my thought in my face; he put his hand on my
shoulders and laughed: "Oh you!... Adam! By the way, about Eve...."
He searched for something in his pockets, took out a little book,
turned over a few leaves and said, "For the day-after-tomorrow,--oh,
no, two days from now,--O-90 has a pink check on you. How about
it?... As before?... You want her to?"

"Of course, of course!"

"All right then, I'll tell her. You see she herself is very
bashful.... What a funny story! You see, for me she has only a
pink-check affection, but for you!... And you, you did not even come
to tell us how a fourth member sneaked into our triangle! Who is it?
Repent, sinner! Come on!"

A curtain rose inside me; rustle of silk, green bottle, lips....
Without any reason whatever I exclaimed (oh, why didn't I restrain
myself at that moment?), "Tell me, R-, did you ever have the
opportunity to try nicotine or alcohol?"

R- sucked in his lips, looked at me from under his brows. I
distinctly heard his thoughts: "Friend though he is, yet...." And he
answered:

"What shall I say? Strictly speaking, no. But I know a woman...."

"I-330?" I cried.

"What! You? You too?" R- was full of laughter; he chuckled, ready to
splash over.

My mirror was hanging in such a way that in order to see R- clearly
I had to turn and look across the table. From my armchair I could
see now only my own forehead and eyebrows. Then I, the real I,
suddenly saw in the mirror a broken, quivering line of brow; I, the
real I, heard suddenly a wild disgusting cry: "What? What does that
'also' mean? What does that 'also' mean? I demand...."

Widely parted negro lips.... Eyes bulging. I (the real I) grasped my
other wild, hairy, heavily breathing self forcibly. I (the real I)
said to him, to R-, "In the name of the Well-Doer, please forgive
me. I am very sick; I don't sleep; I do not know what is the matter
with me."

A swiftly passing smile appeared on the thick lips.

"Yes, yes, I understand, I understand. I am familiar with all this,
theoretically, of course. Good-bye."

At the door he turned around like a little black ball, came back to
the table and put a book upon it. "This is my latest book. I came to
bring it to you. Almost forgot. Good-bye." ("b" like a splash.) The
little ball rolled out.

I am alone. Or, to be more exact, I am _tête-à-tête_ with that
other self. I sit in the armchair and having crossed my legs, I
watch curiously from some indefinite "there," how I (myself) am
shrivelling in my bed!

Why, oh, why is it, that for three years R-, O-, and I were so
friendly together and now suddenly--one word only about that other
female, about I-330, and.... Is it possible that that insanity
called love and jealousy does exist not only in the idiotic books of
the ancients? What seems most strange is that I, I!... Equations,
formulae, figures, and suddenly this! I can't understand it, I
can't! Tomorrow I shall go to R- and tell him.... No, it isn't
true; I shall not go; neither tomorrow nor day after tomorrow, nor
ever.... I can't, I do not want to see him. This is the end. Our
triangle is broken up.

I am alone. It is evening. There is a light fog. The sky is covered
by a thin milky-golden tissue. If I only knew what is there--higher.
If I only knew who I am. Which I am I?




RECORD TWELVE

  The Delimitation of the Infinite
  Angel
  Meditations on Poetry


I continue to believe that I shall recover, that I may recover.
I slept very well. No dreams or any other symptoms of disease.
Dear O-90 will come tomorrow. Everything will again be simple,
regular and limited like a circle. I am not afraid of this word
"limited." The work of the highest faculty of man, judgment, is
always directed toward the constant limiting of the infinite,
toward the breaking up of the infinite into comfortably digestible
portions,--differentials. This is what gives divine beauty to my
element, mathematics. And it is exactly this beauty that that other
female lacks. But this last thought of mine is only an accidental
mental association.

These thoughts swarmed in my mind while I was listening to the
regular, rhythmic sounds of the underground railway. Silently I
followed the rhythm of its wheels and recited to myself R-'s verses
(from the book which he gave me yesterday), and I felt that behind
me some one was leaning over my shoulder and looking at the open
pages. I did not turn around but with the corner of my eye I noticed
pink ears, spread like wings, the double-curved ... like the
letter.... It was he, but I did not want to disturb him. I feigned
not to have noticed him. How he came in, I do not know. I did not
see him when I got into the car.

This incident, insignificant in itself, had an especially good
effect upon me; it invigorated me, I should say. It is pleasant to
feel that somebody's penetrating eye is watching you from behind
your shoulder, lovingly guarding you from making the most minute
mistake, from the most minute incorrect step. It may seem to you too
sentimental but I see in all this the materialization of the dream
of the ancients about a Guardian-Angel. How many things about which
the ancients had only dreams, are materialized in our life!

At the moment when I became aware of the presence of the
Guardian-Angel behind me I was enjoying a poem entitled "Happiness."
I think I am not mistaken when I say that it is a piece of rare
beauty and depth of thought. Here are the first four lines:

  "Two times two--eternal lovers;
  Inseparable in passion four ...
  Most flaming lovers in the world,
  Eternally welded, two times two."

And the rest is in the same vein: on the wisdom and the eternal
happiness of the multiplication table. Every poet is inevitably
a Columbus. America existed before Columbus for ages, but only
Columbus found it. The multiplication table existed before R-13
for ages, but only R-13 could find in the virginal forest of
figures a new Eldorado. Is it not true? Is there any happiness
more wise and cloudless in this wonderful world? Steel may rust.
The ancient god created the ancient man, i.e., the man capable
of mistakes, _ergo_ the ancient god himself made a mistake. The
multiplication table is more wise and more absolute than the ancient
god, for the multiplication table never (do you understand--_never_)
makes mistakes! There are no more fortunate and happy people than
those who live according to the correct, eternal laws of the
multiplication table. No hesitation! No errors! There is but one
truth, and there is but one path to it; and that truth is: four,
and that path is: two times two. Would it not seem preposterous for
these happily multiplied twos suddenly to begin thinking of some
foolish kind of freedom? i.e. (is it not clear?) of a mistake? It
seems undeniable, axiomatic, that R-13 knows how to grasp the most
fundamental, the most....

At that moment again I felt (first near the back of my head, then
on my left ear) the warm, tender breath of the Guardian-Angel. He
apparently noticed that the book on my lap had long been closed and
that my thoughts were somewhere very far.... Well, I am ready this
minute to spread before him the pages of my brain. This gives one
such a feeling of tranquility and joy. I remember I even turned
around and gazed long and questioningly into his eyes; but either
he did not understand, or he did not want to understand me. He did
not ask me anything.... The only thing left for me is to relate
everything to you, my unknown readers. You are to me now as dear and
as near and as far out of reach as he was at that moment.

This was my way of thinking: from the part to the whole,--R-13 is
the part; the whole is our Institution of State Poets and Authors.
I thought: how was it that the ancients did not notice the utter
absurdity of their prose and poetry? The gigantic, magnificent
power of the artistic word was spent by them in vain. It is really
droll; anybody wrote whatever happened to come into his head! It
was as foolish as the fact that in the days of the ancients the
ocean blindly splashed at the shore for twenty-four hours without
interruption or use. The millions of kilogram-meters of energy
which were hidden in the waves were used only for the stimulation
of sweethearts! We obtained electricity from the amorous whisper
of the waves! We made a domestic animal out of that sparkling,
foaming, rabid one! And in the same manner we domesticated and
harnessed the wild element of poetry. Now poetry is no longer the
unpardonable whistling of nightingales but a State Service! Poetry
is a commodity.

Our famous "Mathematical Norms"! Without them in our schools, how
could we love so sincerely and dearly our four rules of arithmetic?
And "Thorns!" This is a classical image: the Guardians are thorns
about a rose; thorns that guard our tender State-Flower from coarse
hands. Whose heart could resist, could remain indifferent to see
and hear the lips of our children recite like a prayer: "A bad boy
caught the rose with his hand but the thorn of steel pricked him
like a needle; the bad boy cried and ran home," etc., etc. And the
"Daily Odes to the Well-Doer!" Who, having read them, will not
bow piously before the unselfish service of that Number of all
Numbers? And the dreadful red "Flowers of Court Sentences!" And the
immortal tragedy, "Those Who Come Late to Work!" And the popular
book, "Stanzas on Sex-Hygiene!"

Our whole life in all its complexity and beauty is thus stamped
forever in the gold of words. Our poets do not soar any longer in
the unknown; they have descended to earth and they march with us,
keeping step to the accompaniment of our austere and mechanical
March of the musical State Tower. Their lyre is the morning
rubbing-sound of the electric tooth-brushes, and the threatening
crack of the electric sparks coming from the Machine of the
Well-Doer, and the magnificent echo of the Hymn of the United State,
and the intimate ringing of the crystalline, shining wash-basins,
and the stimulating rustle of the falling curtains, and the joyous
voices of the newest cook-books, and the almost imperceptible
whisper of the street membranes....

Our gods are here, below. They are with us in the Bureau, in the
kitchen, in the shops, in the rest-rooms. The gods have become like
us, _ergo_ we have become like gods. And we shall come to you, my
unknown readers on another planet, we shall come to you to make your
life as god-like, as rational and as correct as ours....




RECORD THIRTEEN

  Fog
  Thou
  A Decidedly Absurd Adventure


I awoke at dawn. The rose-colored firmament looked into my eyes.
Everything was beautiful, round. "O-90 is to come tonight. Surely
I am healthy again." I smiled and fell asleep. The Morning Bell!
I got up; everything looked different. Through the glass of the
ceiling, through the walls, nothing could be seen but fog,--fog
everywhere, strange clouds, becoming heavier and nearer; the
boundary between earth and sky disappeared. Everything seemed to
be floating and thawing and falling.... Not a thing to hold to. No
houses to be seen; they all were dissolved in the fog like crystals
of salt in water. On the sidewalks and inside the houses dark
figures like suspended particles in a strange milky solution, were
hanging, below, above,--up to the tenth floor. Everything seemed
to be covered with smoke, as though a fire were somewhere raging
noiselessly.

At eleven-forty-five exactly (I looked at the clock particularly at
that time to catch the figures, to save at least the figures) at
eleven-forty-five, just before leaving, according to our Table of
Hours, to go and occupy myself with physical labor, I dropped into
my room for a moment. Suddenly the telephone rang. A voice,--a long
needle slowly penetrating my heart:

"Oh, you are at home? I am very glad! Wait for me at the corner. We
shall go together.... Where? Well, you'll see."

"You know perfectly well that I am going to work now."

"You know perfectly well that you'll do as I say! _Au-revoir._ In
two minutes!..."

I stood at the corner. I had to wait to try to make clear to her
that only the United State directs me, not she. "You'll do as I
say!" How sure she is! One hears it in her voice. And what if...?

Unifs, dull gray as if woven of damp fog would appear for a second
at my side and then soundlessly redissolve. I was unable to turn my
eyes away from the clock.... I seemed myself to have become that
sharp, quivering hand which marked the seconds. Ten, eight minutes
... three ... two minutes to twelve.... Of course! I was late! Oh,
how I hated her, yet I had to wait to prove that I....

A red line in the milky whiteness of the fog--like blood, like a
wound made by a sharp knife--her lips.

"I made you wait, I think? And now you are late for your work
anyway?"

"How...? Well, yes, it is too late now."

I glanced at her lips in silence. All women are lips, lips only.
Some are rosy lips, tense and round, a ring, a tender fence
separating one from the world. But these! A second ago they were not
here, and suddenly ... the slash of a knife! I seemed to see even
the dripping sweet blood....

She came nearer. She leaned gently against my shoulder; we became
one. Something streamed from her into me. I felt, I knew, it
_should_ be so. Every fibre of my nervous system told me this, every
hair on my head, every painfully sweet heartbeat. And what a joy it
was to submit to what _should_ be. A fragment of iron-ore probably
feels the same joy of submission to precise, inevitable law, when
it clings to a loadstone. The same joy is in a stone which thrown
aloft, hesitates a little at the height of its flight and then
rushes down to the ground. It is the same with a man when in his
final convulsion he takes a last deep breath and dies.

I remember I smiled vaguely and said for no reason at all, "Fog ...
very."

"Thou lovest fog, dost thou?"

This ancient, long-forgotten _thou_--the thou of a master to his
slave--penetrated me slowly, sharply.... Yes, I was a slave.... This
too was inevitable, was good.

"Yes, good ..." I said aloud to myself, and then to her, "I hate
fog. I am afraid of fog."

"Then you love it. For if you fear it because it is stronger than
you, hate it because you fear it, you love it. For you cannot
subject it to yourself. One loves only the things one cannot
conquer."

"Yes, that is so. That is why ... that is precisely why I...."

We were walking--as one. Somewhere beyond the fog the sun was
singing in a faint tone, gradually swelling, filling the air with
tension and with pearl and gold and rose and red.... The whole world
seemed to be one unembraceable woman, and we who were in her body
were not yet born; we were ripening in joy. It was clear to me,
absolutely clear, that everything existed only for me: the sun, the
fog, the gold--for me. I did not ask where we were going; what did
it matter? It was pleasure to walk, to ripen, to become stronger and
more tense....

"Here ..." I-330 stopped at a door. "It so happens that today there
is some one on duty who ... I told you about him in the Ancient
House."

Carefully guarding the forces ripening within me, I read the sign:
"Medical Bureau." Automatically only I understood.

... A glass room, filled with golden fog; shelves of glass, colored
bottles, jars, electric wires, bluish sparks in tubes; and a male
Number--a very thinly flattened man. He might have been cut out of a
sheet of paper. Wherever he was, whichever way he turned, he showed
only a profile, a sharply pointed, glittering blade of a nose and
lips like scissors.

I could not hear what I-330 told him; I merely saw her lips when
she was talking; and I felt that I was smiling, irrepressibly,
blissfully. The scissors-like lips glittered and the doctor said,
"Yes, yes, I see. A most dangerous disease. I know of nothing more
dangerous." And he laughed. With his thin, flat, papery hand he
wrote something on a piece of paper and gave it to I-330; he wrote
on another piece of paper and handed it over to me. He had given us
certificates, testifying that we were ill, that we were unable to go
to work. Thus I stole my work from the United State; I was a thief;
I deserved to be put beneath the Machine of the Well-Doer. Yet I was
indifferent to this thought; it was as distant from me as though it
were written in a novel. I took the certificate without an instant's
hesitation. I, all my being, my eyes, my lips, my hands ... knew it
was as it should be.

At the corner, from a half empty garage we took an aero. I-330 took
the wheel as she had done before, pressed the starter and we tore
away from the earth. We soared. Behind us the golden haze; the Sun.
The thin, blade-like profile of the doctor seemed to me suddenly so
dear, so beloved. Formerly I knew everything was revolving around
the Sun. Now I knew everything was revolving around me. Slowly,
blissfully, with half-closed eyes....

At the gate of the Ancient House we found the same old woman. What
a dear mouth, with lips grown together and ray-like wrinkles around
it! Probably those lips have remained grown together all these days;
but now they parted and smiled:

"Ah! you mischievous girl, you! Work is too much for you? Well, all
right, all right. If anything happens I'll run up and warn you."

A heavy, squeaky, opaque door. It closed behind us, and at once my
heart opened painfully, widely, still wider.... My lips ... hers....
I drank and drank from them. I tore myself away; in silence I looked
into her widely open eyes, and then again....

The room in half dusk.... Blue and saffron-yellow lights, dark green
morocco leather, the golden smile of Buddha, a wide mahogany bed,
a glimmer of mirrors.... And my dream of a few days before became
so comprehensible, so clear to me; everything seemed saturated
with the golden prime-juice of life, and it seemed that I was
overflowing with it,--one second more and it would splash out....
Like iron-ore to a loadstone, in sweet submission to the precise
and unchangeable law, inevitably, I clung to her.... There was no
pink check, no counting, no United State; I myself was no more.
Only, drawn together, the tenderly-sharp teeth were there, only her
golden, widely open eyes, and through them I saw deeper, within....
And silence.... Only somewhere in a corner, thousands of miles away
it seemed, drops of water were dripping from the faucet of the
washstand. I was the Universe!

... And between drops whole epochs, eras, were elapsing....

I put on my unif and bent over I-330 to draw her into me with my
eyes--for the last time.

"I knew it.... I knew you," said I-330 in a very low voice. She
passed her hand over her face as though brushing something away;
then she arose brusquely, put on her unif and her usual sharp,
bite-like smile.

"Well, my fallen angel ... you perished just now, do you know that?
No? You are not afraid? Well, _au-revoir_. You shall go home alone.
Well?"

She opened the mirror-door of the cupboard and looking at me over
her shoulder, she waited. I left the room obediently. Yet no sooner
had I left the room than I felt it was urgent that she touch me
with her shoulder--only for one second with her shoulder, nothing
more. I ran back into the room, where (I presumed) she was standing
before the mirror, busy buttoning up her unif; I rushed in and
stopped abruptly. I saw (I remember it clearly), I saw the key
in the keyhole of the closet and the ancient ring upon it was
still swinging but I-330 was not there. She could not have left
the room as there was but one exit.... Yet I-330 was not there! I
looked around everywhere. I even opened the cupboard and felt of the
different ancient dresses; nobody....

I feel somewhat ridiculous, my dear planetary readers, relating
to you this most improbable adventure. But what else can I do
since it all happened exactly as I relate it? Was not the whole
day from early morning, full of improbable adventures? Does it not
all resemble the ancient disease of dream-seeing? If this be so,
what does it matter if I relate one absurdity more, or one less?
Moreover, I am convinced that sooner or later I shall be able to
include all these absurdities in some kind of a logical sequence.
This thought comforts me as I hope it will comfort you.

... How overwhelmed I am! If only you knew how overwhelmed!




RECORD FOURTEEN

  "Mine"
  Impossible
  A Cold Floor


I shall continue to relate my adventures of yesterday. I was busy
during the personal hour before retiring to bed, and thus I was
unable to record everything last night. But everything is graven in
me; especially, for some reason, and apparently forever, I shall
remember that unbearably cold floor....

I was expecting O-90 last evening as it was her regular day. I
went downstairs to the controller on duty to get a permit for the
lowering of my curtains.

"What is the matter with you?" asked the controller. "You seem so
peculiar tonight."

"I ... I am sick."

Strictly speaking, I told her the truth. I certainly am sick.
All this _is_ an illness. Presently I remembered; of course, my
certificate! I touched it in my pocket. Yes, there it was, rustling.
Then all this did happen! It did actually happen!

I held out the paper to the controller. As I did so, I felt the
blood rushing to my cheeks. Without looking directly at her, I
noticed with what an expression of surprise she gazed at me.

Then at twenty-one-thirty o'clock.... In the room to the left the
curtains were lowered, and in the room to the right my neighbor
was sitting over a book. His head is bald and covered with bulging
lumps. His forehead is enormous--a yellow parabola. I was walking up
and down the room--suffering. How could I meet her, after all that
happened! O-90, I mean. I felt plainly to my right, how the eyes of
my neighbor were staring at me. I clearly saw the wrinkles on his
forehead like a row of yellow, illegible lines; and for some reason
I was certain that those lines dealt with me.

A quarter of an hour before twenty-two, the cheerful, rosy whirlwind
was in my room; the firm ring of her rosy arms closed about my neck.
Then I felt how that ring grew weaker and weaker, and then it broke
and her arms dropped....

"You are not the same, not the same man! You are no longer mine!"

"What curious terminology: 'mine.' I never belonged--" I faltered.
It suddenly occurred to me: true, I belonged to no one before, but
now--Is it not clear that now I do not live any more in our rational
world but in the ancient delirious world, in a world of square-root
of minus one?

The curtains fell. There to my right my neighbor let his book drop
at that moment from the table to the floor. And through the last
narrow space between the curtain and the floor I saw a yellow hand
pick up the book. Within I felt: "Only to seize that hand with all
my power."

"I thought ... I wanted to meet you during the hour for the walk. I
wanted ... I must talk to you about so many things, so many...."

Poor, dear, O-90. Her rosy mouth was a crescent with its horns
downward. But I could not tell her everything, could I, if for no
other reason than that it would make her an accomplice of my crimes?
I knew that she would not have the courage to report me to the
Bureau of Guardians, consequently....

"My dear O-, I am sick, I am exhausted. I went again today to the
Medical Bureau; but it is nothing, it will pass. But let us not talk
about it;--let us forget it."

O-90 was lying down. I kissed her gently. I kissed that childish,
fluffy fold at her wrist. Her blue eyes were closed. The pink
crescent of her lips was slowly blooming, more and more like a
flower. I kissed her....

Suddenly I clearly realized how empty I was, how I had given
away.... No, I could not--impossible! I knew I must ... but
no--impossible! I ought ... but no--impossible! My lips cooled at
once. The rosy crescent trembled, darkened, drew together. O-90
covered herself with the bedspread, her face hidden in the pillow.

I was sitting near the bed, on the floor. What a desperately cold
floor! I sat there in silence. The terrible cold from the floor
rose higher and higher. There in the blue, silent space among the
planets, there probably it is as cold.

"Please understand, dear; I did not mean..." I muttered, "With all
my heart, I ..."

It was the truth. I, my real self did not mean.-- ... Yet how could
I express it in words? How could I explain to her that the piece of
iron did not want to.... But that the law is precise, inevitable!

O-90 lifted her face from the pillow and without opening her eyes
she said, "Go away." But because she was crying she pronounced it
"Oo aaa-ay." For some reason this absurd detail will not leave my
memory.

Penetrated by the cold and torpid, I went out into the hall. I
pressed my forehead against the cold glass. Outside a thin, almost
imperceptible film of haze was spread. "Towards night," I thought,
"it will descend again and drown the world. How sad a night it will
be!"

O-90 passed swiftly by, going toward the elevator. The door slammed.

"Wait a minute!" I screamed. I was frightened.

But the elevator was already groaning, going down--down--down....

"She robbed me of R-, she robbed me of O-90, yet, yet ...
nevertheless...."




RECORD FIFTEEN

  The Bell
  The Mirror-Like Sea
  I Am To Burn Eternally


I was walking upon the dock where the _Integral_ is being built,
when the Second Builder came to meet me. His face as usual was round
and white,--a porcelain plate. When he speaks it seems as though he
serves you a plate of something unbearably tasty.

"You chose to be ill, and without the Chief we had an accident, as
it were, yesterday."

"An accident?"

"Yes, sir. We finished the bell and started to let it down, and
imagine! the men caught a male without a number. How he got in, I
cannot make out. They took him to the Operation Department. Oh,
they'll draw the mystery out of the fellow there; 'why' and 'how,'
etc...." He smiled delightedly.

Our best and most experienced physicians work in the Operation
Department under the direct supervision of the Well-Doer himself.
They have all kinds of instruments, but the best of all is the
Gas Bell. The procedure is taken from an ancient experiment of
elementary physics: they used to put a rat under a gas bell and
gradually pump out the air; the air becomes more and more rarified,
and ... you know the rest.

But our Gas Bell is certainly a more perfect apparatus and it is
used in combination with different gasses. Furthermore, we don't
torture a defenseless animal as the ancients did; we use it for a
higher purpose: to guard the security of the United State, in other
words, the happiness of millions. About five centuries ago when the
work of the Operation Department was only beginning, there were
yet to be found some fools who compared our Operation Department
with the ancient Inquisition. But this is as absurd as to compare
a surgeon performing a tracheotomy with a highway cut-throat. Both
use a knife, perhaps the same kind of a knife, both do the same
thing, viz., cut the throat of a living man, yet one is a well-doer,
the other is a murderer; one is marked plus, the other minus....
All this becomes perfectly clear in one second, in one turn of our
logical wheel, the teeth of which engage that _minus_, turn it
upward and thus change its aspect. That other matter is somewhat
different; the ring in the door was still oscillating, apparently
the door had just closed, yet she, I-330, had disappeared; she was
not there! The logical wheel could not turn this fact. A dream? But
even now I feel still in my right shoulder that incomprehensible
sweet pain of I-330 near me in the fog, pressing herself against me.
"Thou lovest fog?" Yes, I love the fog too. I love everything and
everything appears to me wonderful, new, tense; everything is so
good!...

"So good," I said aloud.

"Good?" The porcelain eyes bulged out. "What good do you find in
that? If that man without a number contrived to sneak in, it means
that there are others around here, everywhere, all the time, here
around the _Integral_, they--"

"Whom do you mean by 'they'?"

"How do I know who? But I sense them, all the time."

"Have you heard about the new operation which has been invented? I
mean the surgical removal of fancy?" (There really were rumors of
late about something of the sort.)

"No, I haven't. What has that to do with it?"

"Merely this: if I were you, I should go and ask to have this
operation performed upon me."

The plate expressed distinctly something lemon-like, sour. Poor
fellow! He took offence if one even hinted that he might possess
imagination. Well, a week ago I too should have taken offence at
such a hint. Not so now, for I know that I have imagination, that is
what my illness consists in, and more than that: I know that it is a
wonderful illness,--one does not want to be cured, simply does not
want to!

We ascended the glass steps; the world spread itself below us like
the palm of a hand.

You, readers of these records, whoever you be, you have the sun
above you. And if you ever were ill, as I am now, then you know
what kind of a sun there is or may be in the morning; you know
that pinkish, lucid, warm gold; the air itself looks a little
pinkish; everything seems permeated by the tender blood of the sun;
everything is alive; the stones seem soft and living; iron living
and warm; people all full of life and smiles. It may be that in a
short while all this will disappear, that in an hour the pinkish
blood of the sun will be drained out, but in the meantime everything
is alive. And I see how something flows and pulsates in the sides of
the _Integral_; I see the _Integral_ _think_ of its great and lofty
future, of the heavy load of inevitable happiness which it is to
carry up there into the heights, to you, unseen ones, to you who
seek eternally and who never find. You shall find! You shall be
happy! You must be happy, and you have now not very long to wait!

The body of the _Integral_ is almost ready; it is an exquisite,
oblong ellipsoid, made of our glass, which is everlasting like
gold and flexible like steel. I watched them within, fixing its
transverse ribs and its longitudinal stringers; in the stern they
were erecting the base of the gigantic motor. Every three seconds
the powerful tail of the _Integral_ will eject flame and gasses
into the universal space, and the _Integral_ will soar forward and
higher,--like a flaming Tamerlane of happiness! I watched how the
workers, true to the Taylor system, would bend down, then unbend
and turn around swiftly and rhythmically like levers of an enormous
engine. In their hands they held glittering glass pipes which
emitted bluish streaks of flame; the glass walls were being cut into
with flame; with flame there were being welded the angles, the ribs,
the bars. I watched the monstrous glass cranes easily rolling over
the glass rails; like the workers themselves they would obediently
turn, bend down and bring their loads inward into the bowels of the
_Integral_. All seemed one, humanized machine and mechanized humans.
It was the most magnificent, the most stirring beauty, harmony,
music!

Quick! Down! To them, and with them! And I descended and mingled
with them, fused with their mass, caught in the rhythm of steel and
glass. Their movements were measured, tense and round. Their cheeks
were colored with health, their mirror-like foreheads not clouded by
the insanity of thinking. I was floating upon a mirror-like sea. I
was reposing.... Suddenly one of them turned toward me his care-free
face.

"Well, better today?"

"What better?"

"You were not here yesterday. And we thought something serious...."
His forehead was shining; a childish and innocent smile.

My blood rushed to my face. No, I could not lie, facing those eyes.
I remained silent; I was drowning.... Above, the shiny round white
porcelain face appeared in the hatchway.

"Eh! D-503! Come up here! Something is wrong with a frame and
brackets here, and ..."

Not waiting until he had finished, I rushed to him, upstairs; I was
shamefully saving myself by flight. I had not the power to raise my
eyes. I was dazed by the sparkling glass steps under my feet, and
with every step I made I felt more and more hopeless. I, a corrupted
man, a criminal, was out of place here. No, I shall probably never
again be able to fuse myself into this mechanical rhythm, nor to
float over this mirror-like, untroubled sea. I am to burn eternally
from now on, running from place to place, seeking a nook where I may
hide my eyes, eternally, until I.... A spark cold as ice pierced me:
"I myself, I matter little, but is it necessary that _she_ also...?
I must see that she ..."

I crawled through the hatchway to the deck and stood there; where
was I to go now? I did not know what I had come for! I looked aloft.
The midday sun exhausted by its march, was fuming dimly. Below was
the _Integral_, a gray mass of glass,--dead. The pink blood was
drained out! It was clear to me that all this was my imagination and
that everything remained as before, yet it was also clear to me that
...

"What is the matter with you, D-503? Are you deaf? I call you and
call.... What is the matter with you?" It was the Second Builder
yelling directly into my ear; he must have been yelling that way for
quite a while.

What was the matter with me? I had lost my rudder, the motor was
groaning as before, the aero was quivering and rushing on but it
had no rudder. I did not even know where I was rushing, down to the
earth or up to the sun, to its flame....




RECORD SIXTEEN

  Yellow
  A Two-dimensional Shadow
  An Incurable Soul


I have not written for several days, for I don't know how many.
All my days are alike. All are of one color,--yellow like dry,
overheated sand. Not a patch of shade, not a drop of water, only an
infinity of yellow sand. I cannot live without her, but she, since
she disappeared that day so mysteriously in the Ancient House....

Since that time I have seen her only once, during the hour for the
Walk, two, three, four days ago, I do not remember exactly. All my
days are alike. She only passed swiftly by and for a second filled
up the yellow, empty world. With her, arm in arm, reaching not
higher than her shoulder, were the double-curved S- and the thin
papery doctor, and a fourth person whose fingers only I remember
well; they streamed out, those fingers, from the sleeve of the
unif like a bundle of rays, uncommonly thin, white, long. I-330
raised her hand and waved to me, then she bent toward the one with
the ray-like fingers, over the head of S-. I overheard the word
_Integral_. All four turned around to look at me,--and then they
disappeared in the bluish-gray sea and my road was once more dry and
yellow.

That same evening she had a pink check on me. I stood before the
switchboard and with hatred and tenderness I implored it to click
and soon to show the number I-330. I would jump out into the hall
at every sound of the elevator. The door of the latter would open
heavily. Pale, tall, blonde and dark they would come out of the
elevator, and here and there curtains were falling.... But she was
not there. She did not come. And it is quite possible that now, at
this minute, as I write these lines, at twenty-two o'clock exactly,
with her eyes closed, she is pressing her shoulder against somebody
else _in the same way_ and _in the same way_ she may be asking
someone: "Do you love me?" Whom? Who is he? That one with ray-like
fingers or that thick-lipped, sprinkling R-? Or S-? S-! Why is it
that I have heard his steps splashing behind me as though in a
ditch all these days? Why has he been following me all these days
like a shadow? Ahead of me, to my side, behind me, a grayish-blue,
two-dimensional shadow; people cross it, people step on it but it
remains nearby, attached to me by unseen ties. Perhaps that tie is
I-330. I do not know. Or perhaps they, the Guardians I mean, already
know that I ...

If some one should tell you your shadow sees you, sees you all the
time, would you understand? All at once peculiar sensations arise
in you; your arms seem to belong to someone else, they are in the
way. That is how I feel; very frequently now I notice how absurdly
I wave my hands without any rhythm. I have an irresistible desire to
glance behind me but I am unable to do so, my neck might as well be
forged of iron. I flee, I run faster and faster, and even with my
back I feel that shadow following me as fast as I can run, and there
is no place to hide myself, no place!

At length I reach my room. Alone at last! But here I find another
thing, the telephone. I pick up the receiver. "Yes, I-330 please."
And again I hear a light noise through the receiver; some one's step
in the hall there, passing the door of her room, and--silence.... I
drop the receiver. I cannot, cannot bear it any longer, and I run to
see her!

This happened yesterday. I ran there and for a whole hour from
sixteen to seventeen I wandered near the house in which she lives.
Numbers were passing by in rows. Thousands of feet were beating the
time like a behemoth with a million legs passing by. I was alone,
thrown out by a storm on an uninhabited island, and my eyes were
seeking and seeking among the grayish-blue waves. "There soon," I
thought, "will appear from somewhere the sharp mocking angles of the
brows lifted to the temples, and the dark window-eyes, and there
behind them a flaming fireplace and someone's shadow.... And I will
rush straight in behind those windows and say to her, 'Thou' (yes,
'thou' without fail), 'Thou knowest I cannot live without thee any
longer, then why-- ...?'" But silence reigned.

Suddenly I heard the silence; suddenly I heard the Musical Tower
silenced, and I understood! It was after seventeen already; every
one had already left. I was alone. It was too late to return home.
Around me,--a desert made of glass and bathed with yellow sunshine.
I saw, as if in water, the reflection of the walls in the glass
smoothness of the street, sparkling walls, hanging upside down.
Myself also upside down, hanging absurdly in the glass.

"I must go at once, this very second, to the Medical Bureau or else
... or perhaps _this_ would be best: to remain here, to wait quietly
until they see me and come and take me into the Operation Department
and put an end to everything at once, redeem everything...." A
slight rustle! and the double-curved S- was before me. Without
looking I felt his two gray steel-drill eyes bore quickly into me. I
plucked up all my strength to show a smile and to say (I had to say
something), "I, I must go to the Medical Bureau."

"Who is detaining you? What are you standing here for?"

I was silent, absurdly hanging upside down.

"Follow me," said S- austerely.

I followed obediently, waving my unnecessary, foreign arms. I could
not raise my eyes. I walked through a strange world turned upside
down, where people had their feet pasted to the ceilings, and where
engines stood with their bases upward, and where, still lower, the
sky merged in the heavy glass of the pavement. I remember what
pained me most was the fact that looking at the world for the last
time in my life, I should see it upside down rather than in its
natural state; but I could not raise my eyes.

We stopped. Steps. One step ... and I should see the figures of the
doctors in their white aprons and the enormous dumb Bell.

With force, with some sort of an inner screw, at length I succeeded
in tearing my eyes away from the glass beneath my feet, and I
noticed the golden letters, "Medical Bureau." Why did he bring me
here rather than to the Operation Department? Why did he spare
me?--about this I did not even think at that moment. I made one
jump over all the steps, firmly closed the door behind me and took
a very deep breath, as if I had not breathed since morning and as
if my heart had not beaten for the same length of time, as if only
now I started to breathe and only now there opened a sluice in my
chest....

Inside there were two of them, one a short specimen with heavy legs,
his eyes like the horns of a bull tossing the patients up, the other
extremely thin with lips like sparkling scissors, a nose like a
blade--it was the same man who ... I ran to him as to a dear friend,
straight over close to the blade, and muttered something about
insomnia, dreams, shadows, yellow sand. The scissors-lips sparkled
and smiled.

"Yes, it _is_ too bad. Apparently a soul has formed in you."

A soul?--that strange ancient word that was forgotten long ago....

"Is it ... v-very dangerous?" I stuttered.

"Incurable," was the cut of the scissors.

"But more specifically, what is it? Somehow I cannot imagine--"

"You see ... how shall I put it? Are you a mathematician?"

"Yes."

"Then you see ... imagine a plane, let us say this mirror. You
and I are on its surface. You see? there we are, squinting our
eyes to protect ourselves from the sunlight, or here is the bluish
electric spark in that tube, there the shadow of that aero that just
passed. All this is on the surface, is momentary only. Now imagine
this very same surface softened by a flame so that nothing can any
longer glide over it, so everything instead will penetrate into that
mirror world which excites such curiosity in children. I assure
you, children are not so foolish as we think they are! The surface
becomes a volume, a body, a world; and inside the mirror,--within
you, there is the sunshine, and the whirlwind caused by the aero
propeller, and your trembling lips and someone else's lips also. You
see, the cold mirror reflects, throws out, while this one absorbs;
it keeps forever a trace of everything that touches it. Once you saw
an imperceptible wrinkle on some one's face, and this wrinkle is
forever preserved within you; you may happen to hear in the silence
a drop of water falling,--and you will hear it forever!"

"Yes, yes, that is it!" I grasped his hand. I could hear drops of
water dripping in the silence from the faucet of a washstand and at
once I knew it was forever.

"But tell me please, why suddenly ... suddenly a soul? There was
none, yet suddenly.... Why is it that no one has it, yet I...." I
pressed the thin hand; I was afraid to loosen the safety belt.

"Why? Well, why don't we grow feathers or wings, but only shoulder
blades, bases for wings? We have aeros; wings would only be in the
way. Wings are needed in order to fly, but we don't need to fly
anywhere. We have arrived at the terminus. We have found what we
wanted. Is that not so?"

I nodded vaguely. He glanced at me and laughed a scalpel-like
metallic laugh. The other doctor overheard us and stamped out of
his room on his heavy legs. He picked up the thin doctor with his
horn-eyes, then picked me up.

"What is the matter, a soul? You say a soul? Oh, damn it! We may
soon retrogress even to the cholera epidemics. I told you," he
tossed the thin one on the horns, "I told you the only thing to do
is to operate on them all, wholesale! simply extirpate the centre
for fancy. Only surgery can help here, only surgery." He put on
a pair of enormous X-ray spectacles and remained thus for a long
while, looking into my skull, through the bones into my brain and
making notes.

"Very, very curious! Listen." He looked firmly into my eyes. "Would
you not consent to have me perform an extirpation on you? It would
be invaluable to the United State; it might help us to prevent an
epidemic. If you have no special reasons, of course...."

Some time ago I should probably have said without hesitation, "I am
willing," but now,--I was silent. I caught the profile of the thin
doctor; I implored him!

"You see," he said at last, "Number D-530 is building the _Integral_
and I am sure the operation would interfere...."

"Ah-h!" grumbled the other and stamped back into his room.

We remained alone. The paper-like hand was put lightly and
caressingly upon mine, the profile-like face came nearer and he said
in a very low voice: "I shall tell you a secret. You are not the
only one. My colleague is right when he speaks of an epidemic. Try
to remember, have you not noticed yourself, some one with something
similar, very similar, identical?"

He looked at me closely. What was he alluding to? To whom?... Is it
possible?...

"Listen," I jumped up from my seat. But he had already changed the
subject. In a loud metallic tone:

"... As to the insomnia and for the dreams you complain of, I advise
you to walk a great deal. Tomorrow morning you must begin taking
long walks ... say as far as the Ancient House."

Again he pierced me with his eyes and he smiled thinly. It seemed to
me that I saw enveloped in the tender tissue of that smile a word, a
letter, a name, the only name.... Or was it only my imagination? I
waited impatiently while he wrote a certificate of illness for today
and tomorrow. Once more I gently and firmly pressed his hand, then I
ran out.

My heart now feels light and swift like an aero; it carries me
higher and higher.... I know joy will come tomorrow. What joy?...




RECORD SEVENTEEN

  Through Glass
  I Died
  The Corridor


I am puzzled. Yesterday, at the very moment when I thought
everything was untangled, and that all the X's were at last found,
new unknowns appeared in my equation. The origin of the coordinates
of the whole story is of course the Ancient Home. From this centre
the axes of all the X's, Y's, and Z's radiate, and recently they
have entered into the formation of my whole life.

I walked along the X-axis (Avenue 59) towards the centre. The
whirlwind of yesterday still raged within me; houses and people
upside down; my own hands torturingly foreign to me; glimmering
scissors; the sharp sound of drops dripping from the faucet;--all
this existed, all this _existed_ once! All these things were
revolving wildly, tearing my flesh, rotating wildly beneath the
molten surface, there where the "soul" is located.

In order to follow the instructions of the doctor I chose the road
which followed not the hypotenuse but the two legs of a triangle.
Soon I reached the road running along the Green Wall. From beyond
the Wall, from the infinite ocean of green there rose toward me an
immense wave of roots, branches, flowers, leaves. It rose higher
and higher; it seemed as though it would splash over me and that
from a man, from the finest and most precise mechanism which I am,
I would be transformed into.... But fortunately there was the Green
Wall between me and that wild green sea. Oh, how great and divinely
limiting is the wisdom of walls and bars! This Green Wall is I think
the greatest invention ever conceived. Man ceased to be a wild
animal the day he built the first wall; man ceased to be a wild man
only on the day when the Green Wall was completed, when by this wall
we isolated our machine-like, perfect world from the irrational,
ugly world of trees, birds and beasts....

The blunt snout of some unknown beast was to be seen dimly through
the glass of the Wall; its yellow eyes kept repeating the same
thought which remained incomprehensible to me. We looked into each
other's eyes for a long while. Eyes are shafts which lead from the
superficial world into a world which is beneath the surface. A
thought awoke in me: "what if that yellow-eyed one, sitting there
on that absurd dirty heap of leaves, is happier than I, in his life
which cannot be calculated in figures!" I waved my hand. The yellow
eyes twinkled, moved back and disappeared in the foliage. What a
pitiful being! How absurd the idea that he might be happier! Happier
than _I_ he may be, but I am an exception, am I not? I am sick.

I noticed that I was approaching the dark red walls of the Ancient
House and I saw the grown-together lips of the old woman. I ran to
her with all speed.

"Is she here?"

The grown-together lips opened slowly:

"Who is 'she'?"

"Who? I-330, of course. You remember we came together, she and I, in
an aero the other day."

"Oh, yes, yes, yes,--yes."

Ray-wrinkles around the lips, artful rays radiating from the eyes.
They were making their way deeper and deeper into me.

"Well, she is here, all right. Came in a while ago."

"Here!" I noticed at the feet of the old woman a bush of
silver,--bitter wormwood. (The court of the Ancient House, being a
part of the museum is carefully kept in its prehistoric state.) A
branch of the bush touched the old woman, she caressed that branch;
upon her knees lay stripes of sunshine. For a second I myself, the
sun, the old woman, the wormwood, those yellow eyes, all seemed to
be one; we were firmly united by common veins and one common blood,
boisterous, magnificent blood, was running through those veins.

I am ashamed now to write down all this, but I promised to be frank
to the end of these records: yes, I bent over and kissed that soft,
grown-together mouth of the old woman. She wiped it with her hand
and laughed.

Running, I passed through familiar, half-dark, echoing rooms, and
for some reason I ran straight to the bedroom. When I had reached
the door, a thought flashed: "And if she is there ... not alone?" I
stopped and listened. But all I heard was the tick-tock of my heart,
not within me, but somewhere near, outside me.

I entered. The large bed,--untouched. A mirror ... another mirror
in the door of the cupboard, and in the keyhole an ancient key upon
an ancient ring. No one was there. I called softly: "I-330, are you
here?"--and then in a still lower voice with closed eyes, holding
my breath,--in a voice as though I were kneeling before her, "I-,
dear." Silence. Only the water was dripping fast into the white
basin of the washstand. I cannot now explain why, but I disliked
that sound. I turned the faucet hard and went out. She was not
there, so much was clear. She must be in another "apartment."

I ran down a wide, sombre stairway, pulled one door, another, a
third,--locked. Every room was locked save that of "our" apartment.
And she was not there. I went back again to the same apartment
without knowing why. I walked slowly, with difficulty; my shoe-soles
suddenly became as heavy as cast-iron. I remember distinctly my
thought, "It is a mistake that the force of gravity is a constant;
consequently all my formulae...."

Suddenly--an explosion! A door slammed down below; some one stamped
quickly over the flagstones. I again became lightfooted, extremely
light! I dashed to the railing to bend over, and in one word, one
exclamation, expressed everything: "You!"

I became cold. Below in the square shadow of the window-frame,
flapping its pink wing-ears, the head of S- passed by!

Like lightning I saw only the naked conclusion. Without any premises
(I don't recall any premises even now) the conclusion: he must not
see me here! And on the tips of my toes, pressing myself against the
wall, I sneaked upstairs into the unlocked apartment.

I stopped for a second at the door. He was stamping upward, here. If
only the door.... I prayed to the door but it was a wooden one,--It
squeaked, it squealed. Like a wind something red passed my eyes,
something green, and the yellow Buddha. In front of the mirror-door
of the cupboard, my pale face; my ears still following those steps,
my lips.... Now _he_ was already passing the green and yellow, now
he was passing Buddha, now at the doorsill of the bedroom....

I grasped the key of the cupboard; the ring oscillated. This
oscillation reminded me of something. Again a conclusion, a naked
conclusion without premises; a conclusion, or to be more exact, a
fragment of one: "Now I-330 is...." I brusquely opened the cupboard
and when inside in the darkness shut the door firmly. One step! The
floor shook under my feet. Slowly and softly I floated somewhere
downward; my eyes were dimmed,--I died!

Later when I sat down to describe all these adventures, I sought in
my memory and consulted some books; and now I understand, of course!
I was in a state of temporary death. This state was known to the
ancients, but as far as I am informed it is unknown to us. I have
no conception of how long I was dead, probably not longer than five
or ten seconds, but after awhile I arose from the dead and opened
my eyes. It was dark. But I felt I was falling down--down--down. I
stretched out my hand to attach myself to something but the rough
wall scratched my fingers; it was running away from me, upward. I
felt blood on my fingers. It was clear that all this was not merely
a play of my sick imagination. But what was it? What?

I heard my own frequent, trembling breaths. (I am not ashamed to
confess this, it was all unexpected and incomprehensible.) A minute,
two, three passed; I was still going down. Then a soft bump. The
thing that had been falling away from under my feet was motionless.
I found in the darkness a knob, and turned it; a door opened;
there was a dim light. I now noticed behind me a square platform,
travelling upward. I tried to run back to it but it was too late. "I
am cut off here," I thought. Where "here" might be, I did not know.

A corridor. A heavy silence. The small lamps on the vaulted ceiling
resembled an endless, twinkling, dotted line. The corridor was
similar to the "tube" of our underground railways but it was much
narrower, and made not of our glass but of some other, very ancient
material. For a moment I thought of the underground caves where they
say many tried to save themselves during the Two Hundred Years' War.
There was nothing to do but to walk ahead.

I walked, I think, for about twenty minutes. A turn to the right,
the corridor became wider, the small lamps brighter. There was a
dim droning somewhere.... Was it a machine or voices? I did not
know. I stood before a heavy, opaque door, from behind which came
the noise. I knocked. Then I knocked again, louder. Now there was
silence behind the door. Something clanked; the door opened slowly
and heavily.

I don't know which of us was the more dumbfounded; the thin
blade-like doctor stood before me!

"You here!" his scissors opened and remained open.

And I, as if I did not know a human word, stood silent, merely
stared, without comprehending that he was talking to me. He must
have told me to leave, for with his thin paper stomach he slowly
pressed me to the side, to the more brightly lighted end of the
corridor and poked me in the back.

"Beg your pardon ... I wanted ... I thought that she, I-330 ... but
behind me...."

"Stay where you are," said the doctor brusquely, and he disappeared.

At last! At last she was nearby, here, and what did it matter where
"here" was? I saw the familiar saffron-yellow silk, the smile-bite,
the eyes with their curtains drawn.... My lips quivered, so did my
hands and knees, and I had a most stupid thought: "Vibrations make
sounds. Shivering must make a sound. Why then don't I hear it?"

Her eyes opened for me widely. I entered into them.

"I could not ... any longer!... Where have you been?... Why?..."

I was unable to tear my eyes away from her for a second, and I
talked as if in a delirium, fast and incoherently, or perhaps I
only thought without speaking out: "A shadow ... behind me. I died.
And from the cupboard.... Because that doctor of yours ... speaks
with his scissors.... I have a soul ... incurable ... and I must
walk...."

"An incurable soul? My poor boy!" I-330 laughed. She covered me
with the sparkles of her laughter; my delirium left me. Everywhere
around her little laughs were sparkling! How good it was!

The doctor reappeared from around the turn, the wonderful,
magnificent, thinnest doctor.

"Well?" He was already beside her.

"Oh, nothing, nothing. I shall tell you later. He got here by
accident. Tell them that I shall be back in about a quarter of an
hour."

The doctor slid around the corner. She lingered. The door closed
with a heavy thud. Then slowly, very slowly, piercing my heart with
a sharp sweet needle, I-330 pressed against me with her shoulder and
then with her arm, with her whole body, and we walked away as if
fused into one.

I do not remember now where we turned into darkness; in the darkness
we walked up some endless stairway in silence. I did not see but I
knew, I knew that she walked as I did, with closed eyes, blind, her
head thrown a little backward, biting her lips and listening to the
music, that is to say, to my almost audible tremor.

I returned to consciousness in one of the innumerable nooks in the
courtyard of the Ancient House. There was a fence of earth with
naked stone ribs and yellow teeth of walls half fallen to pieces.
She opened her eyes and said, "Day-after-tomorrow at sixteen." She
was gone.

Did all this really happen? I do not know. I shall learn
day-after-tomorrow. One real sign remains: on my right hand the
skin has been rubbed from the tips of three fingers. But today, on
the _Integral_ the Second Builder assured me that he saw me touch
the polishing wheel with those very same fingers. Perhaps I did. It
is quite probable. I don't know. I don't know anything.




RECORD EIGHTEEN

  Logical Debris
  Wounds and Plaster
  Never Again


Last night as soon as I had gone to bed, I fell momentarily to the
bottom of the ocean of sleep like an overloaded ship which has been
wrecked. The heavy thicket of wavy green water enveloped me. Then
slowly I floated from the bottom upward, and somewhere in the middle
of that course, I opened my eyes,--my room! The morning was still
green and motionless. A fragment of sunshine coming from the mirror
on my closet door shone into my eyes. This fragment does not permit
me to sleep, being thus an obstacle in the way of exactly fulfilling
the rules of the Tables which prescribe so many hours of sleep.
I should have opened the closet but I felt as though I were in a
spider web, and cobweb covered my eyes; I had no power to sit up.

Yet I got up and opened the closet door; suddenly, there behind that
door, making her way through the mass of garments which hung there,
was I-330! I have become so accustomed of late to most improbable
things, that as far as I remember I was not even surprised; I did
not even ask a question. I jumped into the closet, slammed the
mirror-door behind me and breathlessly, brusquely, blindly, avidly I
clung to her. I remember clearly even now:--through the narrow crack
of the door a sharp sun-ray like lightning broke into the darkness
and played on the floor and walls of the closet, and a little higher
the cruel ray-blade fell upon the naked neck of I-330, and this for
some reason seemed to me so terrible that I could not bear it, and I
screamed;--and again I opened my eyes. My room!

The morning was still green and motionless. On the door of my closet
was a fragment of the sunshine. I was in bed. A dream? Yet my heart
was still wildly beating, quivering and twitching; there was a dull
pain in the tips of my fingers and in my knees. _This_ undoubtedly
_did_ happen! And now I am unable any more to distinguish what is
dream from what is actuality; irrational numbers grow through my
solid, habitual, tri-dimensional life; and instead of firm, polished
surfaces--there is something shaggy and rough....

I waited long for the Bell to ring. I was lying thinking, untangling
a very strange logical chain. In our superficial life, every
formula, every equation, corresponds to a curve or a solid. We
have never seen any curve or solid corresponding to my square-root
of minus one. The horrifying part of the situation is that there
exist such curves or solids; unseen by us they do exist, they
must, inevitably; for in mathematics as on a screen, strange sharp
shadows appear before us. One must remember that mathematics like
death, never makes mistakes, never plays tricks. If we are unable
to see those irrational curves or solids, it only means that they
inevitably possess a whole immense world somewhere beneath the
surface of our life....

I jumped up without waiting for the waking Bell and began to pace
up and down the room. My mathematics, the only firm and immovable
island of my shaken life, this too was torn from its anchor and
was floating, whirling. Then it means that that absurd thing, the
"soul," is as real as my unif, as my boots, although I do not see
them since they are behind the door of the closet. If boots are not
a sickness, why should the "soul" be one? I sought, but I could not
find, a way out of the logical confusion. It looked to me like that
strange and sad debris beyond the Green Wall; my logical debris
too, is filled with extraordinary, incomprehensible, wordless
but speaking beings. It occurred to me for a moment that through
some strange, thick glass I saw _it_; I saw it at once infinitely
large and infinitely small, scorpion-like with hidden but ever
perceptible sting; I _saw_ the square-root of minus one. Perhaps it
was nothing else but my "soul," which like the legendary scorpion of
the ancients, was voluntarily stinging itself with....

The Bell! The day began. All I saw and felt neither died, nor
disappeared, it merely became covered with daylight, as our visible
world does not die or disappear at the end of the day but merely
becomes covered with the darkness of night. My head was filled by
a light, thin haze. Through that haze I perceived the long glass
tables and the globe-like heads busy chewing, slowly, silently,
in unison. At a distance, through the haze, the metronome was
slowly beating its tick-tock, and to the accompaniment of this
customary and caressing music I joined with the others in counting
automatically to fifty: fifty is the number of chewing movements
required by the law of the State for every piece of food. And
automatically then, keeping time, I went downstairs and put my
name down in the book for the outgoing Numbers,--as everyone did.
But I felt I _lived_ separately from everybody; I lived by myself
separated by a soft wall which absorbs noises; beyond that wall
there was my world.

Here a thought occurred to me. If that world is only my own, why
should I tell about it in these records? Why should I recount
all these absurd "dreams" about closets, endless corridors? With
great sorrow I notice that instead of a correct and strictly
mathematical poem in honor of the United State, I am writing a
fantastic novel. Oh! if only it were a novel and not my actual life,
full of X's, square-roots of minus one and down-fallings! Yet all
may be for the best. Probably you, my unknown readers, are children
still as compared with us. We are brought up by the United State;
consequently we have reached the highest summits attainable by man.
And you, being children, may swallow without crying all the bitter
things I am to give you only if they be coated with the syrup of
adventures.

  * * * * *

_The Same Evening_

Are you familiar with the following sensation? You are in an aero
and you dash upward along a blue spiral line; the window is open and
the wind rushes past your face, whistling. There is no earth. The
earth is forgotten. The earth is as far from you as Venus, Saturn
or Jupiter. That is how I live now. A hurricane wind beats into my
face; I forget the earth, forget rosy, dear O-90. Yet the earth does
exist and sooner or later I must plane down to that earth; only I
close my eyes to avoid seeing the date at which there is the name
O-90 written on my Tables.

This evening the distant earth reminded me of itself. In order to
fulfill the recommendation of the doctor (I desire sincerely, most
sincerely I desire to be cured), I wandered for two hours and eight
minutes over the straight lines of the deserted avenues. Everybody
was in the auditoriums, in accordance with the Table. Only I, cut
off from the rest, I was alone. Strictly speaking, it was a very
unnatural situation. Imagine a finger cut off from the whole, from
the hand; a separate human finger, somewhat hunched, running over
the glass sidewalk. I was such a finger. What seemed most strange
and unnatural was that the finger had no desire to be with its
hand, with its fellows. I want either to be alone or with _her_;
to transfuse my whole being into hers through a contact with her
shoulder or through our interwoven fingers.

I came home as the sun was setting. The pink dust of evening was
covering the glass of the walls, the golden peak of the Accumulating
Tower, the voices and smiles of the Numbers. Is it not strange: the
passing rays of the evening sun fall to the earth at the same angle
as the awakening rays of the morning, yet they make everything seem
so different; the pink tinge is different. At sunset it is so quiet,
somewhat melancholy; at sunrise it is resounding, boisterous.

In the hall downstairs when I entered, I saw U-, the controller. She
took a letter from the heaps of envelopes covered with pink dust and
handed it to me. I repeat: she is a very respectable woman and I am
sure she has only the very best feelings towards me.... Yet, every
time I see those cheeks hanging down, which look like the gills of a
fish, I....

Holding out her dry hand with the letter, U- sighed. But that sigh
only very slightly moved in me the curtains which separate me from
the rest of the world. I was completely projected upon the envelope
which trembled in my hand. I had no doubt but that it was a letter
from I-330.

At that moment I heard another sigh, such a deliberate one,
underscored with two lines, that I raised my eyes from the envelope
and saw a tender, cloudy smile coming from between the gills,
through the bashful jalousies of lowered eyes. And then:

"You poor, poor, dear!..." a sigh underscored with three lines, and
a glance at the letter, an imperceptible glance. (What was in the
letter she naturally knew, _ex officio_.)

"No, really?... Why?"

"No, no, dear, I know better than you. For a long time I have
watched you and I see that you need some one with years of
experience of life to accompany you."

I felt all pasted around by her smile. It was like a plaster upon
the wounds which were to be inflicted upon me by the letter I held
in my hand. Finally, through the bashful jalousies of her eyes, she
said in a very low voice: "I shall think about it, dear. I shall
think it over. And be sure that if I feel myself strong enough ..."

"Great Well-Doer! Is it possible that my lot is?... Is it possible
that she means to say, that she?..."

My eyes were dimmed and filled with thousands of sinusoids; the
letter was trembling. I went near the light, to the wall. There the
light of the sun was going out; from the sun was falling thicker and
thicker the dark, sad, pink dust, covering the floor, my hands, the
letter. I opened the envelope and found the signature as fast as I
could,--the first wound! It was not I-330; it was O-90! And another
wound: in the right-hand corner a slovenly splash,--a blot! I cannot
bear blots. It matters little whether they are made by ink or by ...
well, it matters not by what. Heretofore, such a blot would have had
only a disagreeable effect, disagreeable to the eyes; but now--why
did that small gray blot seem to be like a cloud and seem to spread
about me a leaden, bluish darkness? Or was it again the "soul" at
work? Here is a transcript of the letter:

"You know, or perhaps you don't ... I cannot write well. Little it
matters! Now you know that without you there is for me not a single
day, a single morning, a single spring, for R- is only ... well,
that is of no importance to you. At any rate, I am very grateful
to him, for without him, alone all these days, I don't know what
would.... During these last few days and nights I have lived through
ten years, or perhaps twenty years. My room seemed to me not square
but round; I walk around without end, round after round, always the
same thing, not a door to escape through. I cannot live without
you because I love you; and I should not, I cannot be with you any
more,--because I love you! Because I see and I understand that you
need no one now, no one in the world save that other, and you must
realize that it is precisely because I love you I must ...

"I need another two or three days in order to paste together the
fragments of myself and thus restore at least something similar to
the O-90 of old. Then I shall go myself, and myself I shall state
that I take your name from my list, and this will be better for you;
you must feel happy now. I shall never again...."

"Good-bye, O-."

Never again. Yes, that is better. She is right. But, why then?...
Why then?...




RECORD NINETEEN

  The Infinitesimal of the Third Order
  From Under the Forehead
  Over the Railing


There in the strange corridor lighted by the dotted line of dim
little electric lamps ... or no, no, later, when we had already
reached one of the nooks in the courtyard of the Ancient House, she
said, "Day-after-tomorrow." That "day-after-tomorrow" is today. And
everything seems to have wings and to fly; the day flies; and our
_Integral_ too already has wings. We finished placing the motor
and tried it out today, without switching it in. What magnificent,
powerful salvos! Each of them sounded for me like a salute in honor
of _her_, the only one,--in honor of today!

At the time of the first explosion about a dozen loafing Numbers
from the docks stood near the main tube--and nothing was left of
them save a few crumbs and a little soot. With pride I write down
now that this occurrence did not disturb the rhythm of our work even
for a second. Not a man shrank. We and our lathes continued our
rectilinear or curved motions with the same sparkling and polished
precision as before, as if nothing had happened. As a matter of
fact, what did happen? A dozen Numbers represent hardly one hundred
millionth part of the United State. For practical consideration,
that is but an infinitesimal of the third order. That _pity_, a
result of arithmetical ignorance, was known to the ancients; to us
it seems absurd.

It seems droll to me also, that yesterday I was thinking, even
relating in these pages about a gray blot! All that was only the
"softening of the surface" which is normally as hard as diamond,
like our walls. (There is an ancient saying: "Shooting beans at a
stone wall--")

Sixteen o'clock. I did not go for the supplementary walk; who knows,
she might come now, when the sun is so noisily bright.

I am almost the only one in his room. Through the walls full of
sunshine I see for a distance to the right and to the left and below
strings of other rooms, repeating each other as if in a mirror,
hanging in the air and empty. Only on the bluish stairway, striped
by the golden ink of the sun, is seen rising a thin, gray shadow.
Already I hear steps, and I see through the door and I feel a smile
pasted to my face like a plaster. But it passed to another stairway
and down. The click of the switchboard! I threw myself to that
little white slit and ... an unfamiliar male Number! (A consonant
means a male Number.)

The elevator groaned and stopped. A big, slovenly, slanting forehead
stood before me, and the eyes ... They impressed me strangely; it
seemed as if the man talked with his eyes which were deep under the
forehead.

"Here is a letter from her, for you." (From under the awning of that
forehead.) "She asked that everything ... as requested in the letter
... without fail." This too, from under the forehead, from under the
awning, and he turned, looked about.

"No, there is nobody, nobody. Quickly! the letter!"

He put the letter in my hand and went out without a word.

A pink check fell out of the envelope. It was hers, _her_ check! Her
tender perfume! I felt like running to catch up with that wonderful
under-the-forehead one. A tiny note followed the check from the
envelope; three lines: "The check ... Lower the curtains without
fail, as if I were actually with you. It is necessary that they
should think that I ... I am very, very sorry."

I tore the note into small bits. A glance at the mirror revealed
my distorted, broken eyebrows. I took the check and was ready to
do with it as I had done with the note. "She asked that everything
... as requested in the letter ... without fail." My arms weakened
and the hands loosened. The check was back on the table. She _is_
stronger than I, stronger than I. It seemed as though I were going
to act as she wished. Besides ... however, it is a long time before
evening.

The check remained on the table. In the mirror--my distorted, broken
eyebrows. Oh, why did I not have a doctor's certificate for today? I
should like to go and walk, walk without end around the Green Wall
and then to fall on my bed ... to the bottom of.... Yet I had to go
to Auditorium No. 13, and I should have to grip myself, so as to
bear up for two hours! Two hours without motion, at a time when I
wanted to scream and stamp my feet!

The lecture was on. It was very strange to hear from the sparkling
tube of the phono-lecturer not the usual metallic voice but a soft,
velvety, mossy one. It was a woman's voice and I seemed to have a
vision of the woman: a little hook-like old woman, like the one of
the Ancient House.

The Ancient House! Suddenly from within me a powerful fountain
of.... I had to use all my strength to control myself, so as not to
fill the auditorium with screams. The soft mossy words were piercing
me, yet only empty words about children and child-production reached
my ear. I was like a photographic plate: everything was making
its imprint with a strange, senseless precision on me; the golden
scythe which was nothing more than the reflection of light from the
megaphone of the lecture apparatus, under the megaphone a child,
a living illustration. It was leaning toward the megaphone, the
angle of its infinitesimal unif in its mouth, its little fist
clenched firmly, its thumb squeezed into the fist, a light fluffy
pleat of skin at the wrist. Like a photographic plate I was taking
the impression of all this. Now I saw how its naked leg hung over
the edge of the platform, the pink fan of its finger waved in the
air.... One minute more, one second and the child would be on the
floor!

A female's scream, a wave of translucent wings, her unif on the
platform! She caught the child, her lips clung to the fluffy pleat
of the baby's wrist; she moved the child to the middle of the
table and left the platform. The imprints were registering in
me: a pink crescent of a mouth, the horns downward! Eyes like
small blue saucers filled with liquid! It was O-90. And as if
reading a consequential formula, I suddenly felt the necessity, the
naturalness of that insignificant occurrence.

She sat down behind me, somewhat to my left. I looked back.
She quietly removed her gaze from the table and the child and
looked straight into me. Within again: She, I, the table on the
platform,--three points: and through those three points lines were
drawn, a projection of some as yet unforeseen events!

Then I went home through the green dusky street which seemed
many-eyed because of the electric lights. I heard myself
tick-tocking like a clock. And the hands of that clock seemed to be
about to pass a figure: I was going to do something, something that
would cut off every way of retreat. She wants somebody, whom I do
not know, to think she is with me. I want her; what do I care what
_she_ wants? I do not want to be alone behind the curtains and that
is all there is to it!

From behind came sounds of a familiar gait, like splashing in a
ditch. I did not need to look back, I knew it was S-. He would
follow me to the very door, probably. Then he would stay below on
the sidewalk, and he would try to drill upward into my room with his
boring eyes, until the curtains would fall, concealing something
criminal.

Was he my Guardian-Angel? No! My decision was made.

When I came into my room and turned on the light, I could not
believe my eyes! O-90 stood at my table, or to be more exact,
she was hanging like a creased empty dress. She seemed to have
no tensity, no spring beneath the dress; her arms and legs were
springless, her voice was hanging and springless.

"About my letter, did you receive it? Yes? I must know your answer,
I must--today."

I shrugged my shoulders. I enjoyed looking into her blue eyes which
were filled with tears as if she were the guilty one. I lingered
over my answer. With pleasure I pricked her:

"Answer? Well.... You are right. Undoubtedly. In everything."

"Then ..." (She tried to cover the minute tremor with a smile but
it did not escape me.) "Well, all right. I shall ... I shall leave
you at once."

Yet she remained drooping over the table. Drooping eyelids, drooping
arms and legs. The pink check of the other was still on the table. I
quickly opened this manuscript, "WE," and with its pages I covered
the check, trying to hide it from myself, rather than from O-.

"See, here, I am still busy writing. Already 101 pages! Something
quite unexpected comes out in this writing."

In a voice, in a shadow of a voice, "And do you remember ... how the
other day I ... on the _seventh_ page ... and it dropped...."

The tiny blue saucers filled to the borders; silently and rapidly
the tears ran down her cheeks. And suddenly, like the dropping of
the tears,--rushing forth,--words:

"I cannot ... I shall leave you in a moment. I shall never again ...
and I don't care.... Only I want, I must have a child! From you!
Give me a child and I will leave. I will!"

I saw she was trembling all over beneath her unif, and I felt ...
I too, would soon ... would.... I put my hands behind my back and
smiled.

"What? You desire to go under the Machine of the Well-Doer?"

Like a stream her words ran over the dam.

"I don't care. I shall feel it for a while within me. I want to see,
to see only once the little fold of skin here at the wrist, like
that one on the table in the Auditorium. Only for one day!"

Three points: she, I and a little fist with a fluffy fold of skin
there on the table!

I remember how once when I was a child they took me up on the
Accumulating Tower. At the very top I bent over the glass railing
of an opening in the Tower. Below people seemed like dots; my heart
contracted sweetly. "What if...." On that occasion I only clenched
my hands around the railing; now I jumped over.

"So you desire ... being perfectly aware that ..."

Her eyes were closed as if the sun were beating straight into her
face. A wet, shining smile!

"Yes, yes! I want it!"

Quickly I took out the pink check of the other from under the
manuscript and down I went to the controller on duty. O-90 caught
my hand, screamed out something, but what it was I understood only
later, when I returned.

She was sitting on the edge of the bed, hands firmly clasped about
the knees.

"Is it, is it her check?"

"What does it matter? Well, it is hers, yes."

Something cracked. It must have been the springs of the bed, for
O-90 made a slight motion only. She remained sitting, her hands upon
her knees.

"Well, quick...." I roughly pressed her hand. A red spot was left
on her wrist (tomorrow it would become purple), where the fluffy,
infantile fold.... It was the last.... I turned the switch, my
thoughts went out with the light. Darkness, a spark! and I had
jumped over the railing, down....




RECORD TWENTY

  Discharge
  The Material of a Idea
  The Zero Rock


_Discharge_ is the best word for it. Now I see that it was actually
like an electric discharge. The pulse of my last few days had been
becoming dryer and dryer, more and more frequent, more intense.
The opposite poles had been drawing nearer and nearer and already
I could hear the dry crackling; one millimeter more, and--an
explosion! Then silence.

Within me there is quiet now and emptiness like that of a house
after everybody has left, when one lies ill, all alone and hears so
clearly the distinct, metallic, tick-tock of thoughts.

Perhaps that "discharge" cured me at last of my torturing "soul."
Again I am like all of us. At least at this moment as I write, I
can see as it were, without any pain in my mental eye, how O-90 is
brought to the steps of the Cube; or I see her in the Gas Bell. And
if there in the Operation Department she should give my name,--I do
not care. Piously and gratefully I should kiss the punishing hand
of the Well-Doer at the last moment. I have this right in regard to
the United State: to receive my punishment. And I shall not give up
this right. No Number ought, or dares, to refuse this only personal,
and therefore, most precious, privilege.

... Quickly, metallically, distinctly, do the thoughts rap in the
head. An invisible aero carries me into the blue height of my
beloved abstractions. And I see how there in the height, in the
purest rarified air, my judgment about the only "right" bursts with
a crack, like a pneumatic tire. I see clearly that only an atavism,
the absurd superstition of the ancients, gives me this idea of
"right."

There are ideas of clay and ideas moulded of gold, or of our
precious glass. In order to know the material of which an idea is
made, one needs only to let fall upon it a drop of strong acid.
One of these acids was known to the ancients under the name of
_reductio ad absurdum_. This was the name of it, I think. But they
were afraid of this poison; they preferred to believe that they saw
_heaven_, even though it was a toy made of clay, rather than confess
to themselves that it was only a blue nothing. We on the other hand
(Glory to the Well-Doer!), we are adults and we have no need of
toys. Now if we put a drop of acid on the idea of "right".... Even
the ancients (the most mature of them) knew that the source of right
was--might! Right is a function of might. Here we have our scale: on
the one side an ounce, on the other a ton. On one side "I," on the
other "we," the United State. Is it not clear? To assume that I may
have any "right" as far as the State is concerned, is like assuming
that an ounce may equilibrate a ton in a scale! Hence the natural
distribution: tons--rights, grams--duties. And the natural road from
nothingness to greatness, is to forget that one is a gram and to
feel that one is one-millionth of a ton!

You ripe-bodied, bright Venerians; you sooty, blacksmith-like
Uranians, I almost hear your protests in this silence. But only
think, everything that is great is simple. Remember, only the four
rules of arithmetic are unshakeable and eternal! And only that
mortality will be unshakeable and eternal which is built upon those
four rules. This is the superior wisdom, this is the summit of that
pyramid around which people red with sweat, fought and battled for
centuries trying to crawl up!

Looking from this summit down to the bottom, where something is
still left swarming like worms, from this summit all that is left
over in us from the ancients seems alike. Alike are the unlawful
coming motherhood of O-90, a murder, and the insanity of that
Number who dared to throw verses into the face of the United State;
and alike is the judgment for them--premature death. This is that
divine justice of which those stone-housed ancients dreamed, lit by
the naive pink rays of the dawn of history. Their "God" punished
sacrilege as a capital crime.

You Uranians, morose and as black as the ancient Spaniards, who
were wise in knowing so well how to burn at the stake, you are
silent; I think you agree with me. But I hear you, pink Venerians,
saying something about "tortures, executions, return to barbarism."
My dear Venerians, I pity you! You are incapable of philosophical,
mathematical thinking. Human history moves upward in circles,
like an aero. The circles are at times golden, sometimes they are
bloody, but all have 360 degrees. They go from 0° to 10°, 20°, 200°,
360°,--and then again 0°. Yes, we have returned to zero. But for a
mathematically working mind it is clear that this zero is different;
it is a perfectly new zero. We started from zero to the right and
came to zero on the left. Hence instead of plus zero, we are at
minus zero. Do you understand?

This zero appears to me now as a silent, immense, narrow rock,
sharp as a blade. In cruel darkness, holding our breath, we set
sail from the black night-side of the zero rock. For centuries we,
Columbuses, floated and floated; we made the circuit of the whole
world and at last! Hurrah! Salute! We climbed up the masts; before
us now was a new side of the zero rock, hitherto unknown, bathed
in the Polar light of the United State; a blue mass covered with
rainbow sparkles! Suns!--a hundred suns! A million rainbows! What
does it matter if we are separated from the other, black side of
the zero rock only by the thickness of a blade? A knife is the most
solid, the most immortal, the most inspired invention of man. The
knife served on the guillotine. The knife is the universal tool for
cutting knots. The way of paradoxes follows its sharp edge, the only
way becoming to a fearless mind....




RECORD TWENTY-ONE

  The Duty of an Author
  The Ice-swells
  The Most Difficult Love


Yesterday was her day and again she did not come. Again there
came her incoherent note, explaining nothing. But I am tranquil,
perfectly tranquil. If I do act as I am told to in the note, if I
do go to the controller on duty, produce the pink check and then,
having lowered the curtains if I do sit alone in my room, I do all
this of course not because I have no power to act contrary to her
desire. It seems funny? Decidedly not! It is quite simple: separated
from all curative, plaster-like smiles I am enabled quietly to
write these very lines. This first. And second: I am afraid to lose
in her, in I-330, perhaps the only clue I shall ever have to the
understanding of all the unknowns, like the story of the cupboard,
or my temporary death, for instance. To understand, to discover
these unknowns as the author of these records, I feel it simply my
duty. Moreover, the unknown is naturally the enemy of man. And _Homo
Sapiens_ only then becomes Man in the complete sense of the word,
when his punctuation includes no question marks, only exclamation
points, commas and periods.

Thus, guided by what seems to me simply my duty as an author, I
took an aero today at sixteen o'clock and went to the Ancient
House. A strong wind was blowing against me. The aero advanced with
difficulty through the thicket of air, its transparent branches
whistling and whipping. The city below seemed a heap of blue blocks
of ice. Suddenly--a cloud, a swift, oblique shadow. The ice became
leaden; it swelled. As in springtime when you happen to stand at the
shore and wait; in one more minute everything will move and pull
and crack! But the minute passes and the ice remains motionless;
you feel as though you yourself are swelling, your heart beats
more restlessly, more frequently.... But why do I write about all
this? And whence all these strange sensations? For is there such an
iceberg as could ever break the most lucid, solid crystal of our
life?

At the entrance of the Ancient House I found no one. I went around
it and found the old janitress near the Green Wall. She held her
hand above her eyes, looking upward. Beyond the Wall, sharp black
triangles of some birds; they would rush, cawing, in onslaught
on the invisible fence of electric waves, and as they felt the
electricity against their breasts, they would recoil and soar once
more beyond the Wall.

I noticed oblique, swift shadows on the dark, wrinkled face, a quick
glance at me.

"Nobody here, nobody, nobody! No! And no use coming here...."

In what respect is it "no use" and what a strange idea, to consider
me somebody's shadow. Perhaps all of you are only my shadows. Did I
not populate these pages which only recently were white quadrangular
deserts, with you? Without me would they whom I shall guide over the
narrow paths of my lines, could they ever see you?

Of course I did not say all this to the old woman. From experience
I know that the most torturing thing is to inoculate someone with a
doubt as to the fact that he or she is a three-dimensional reality
and not some other reality. I remarked only, quite drily, that her
business was to open the gate, and she let me into the courtyard.

It was empty. Quiet. The wind remained beyond the walls, distant
as on that day, when shoulder to shoulder, two like one, we came
out from beneath, from the corridors,--if it ever really happened.
I walked under stone arches, my steps resounded against the
damp vaults and fell behind me, sounding as though someone were
continually following me. The yellow walls with patches of red brick
were watching me through their square spectacles, windows,--watching
me open the squeaky doors of a barn, look into corners, nooks
and hidden places.... A gate in the fence and a lonely spot. The
monument of the Two Hundred Years' War. From the ground naked, stone
ribs were sticking out. The yellow jaws of the wall. An ancient oven
with a chimney like a ship petrified forever among red-brick waves.

It seemed to me that I had seen those yellow teeth once before.
I saw them still dimly in my mind, as at the bottom of a
barrel, through water. And I began to search. I fell into caves
occasionally; I stumbled over stones; rusty jaws caught my unif a
few times; salt drops of sweat ran from my forehead into my eyes.

Nowhere! I could find that exit from below, from the corridors,
nowhere! There was none. Well, perhaps it was better that it
happened so. Probably that _all_ was only one of my absurd "dreams."

Tired out, covered with cobweb and dust, I opened the gate to return
to the main yard, when suddenly ... a rustle behind me, splashing
steps, and there before me were the pink wing-like ears and the
double-curved smile of S-. Half closing his eyes, he bored his
little drills into me and asked:

"Taking a walk?"

I was silent. My arms were heavy.

"Well, do you feel better now?"

"Yes, thank you. I think I am getting normal again."

He let me go. He lifted his eyes, looked upward, and I noticed his
Adam's apple for the first time; it resembles a broken spring,
sticking out from beneath the upholstery of a divan.

Above us, not very high (about 50 meters) aeros were buzzing. By
their low, slow flight and by the observation tubes which hung down,
I recognized them. They were the aeros of the Guardians. But there
were not two or three, as usual, there were about ten or twelve (I
regret to have to confine myself to an approximate figure).

"Why are there so many today?" I dared to ask S-.

"Why? Hm.... A real physician begins to treat a patient when
he is still well but on the way to becoming sick tomorrow,
day-after-tomorrow or within a week. Prophylaxis! Yes!"

He nodded and went splashing over the stones of the yard. Then he
turned his head and said over his shoulder, "Be careful!"

Again I was alone. Silence. Emptiness. Far beyond the Green Wall the
birds and the wind. What did he mean? My aero ran very fast with the
wind. Light and heavy shadows from the clouds. Below blue cupolas,
cubes of glass-ice were becoming leaden and swelling....

_The Same Evening_

I took up my pen just now in order to write upon these pages a
few thoughts which, it seems to me, will prove useful for you,
my readers. These thoughts are concerned with the great Day of
Unanimity which is now not far away. But as I sat down, I discovered
that I cannot write at present; instead I sit and listen to the wind
beating the glass with its dark wings; all the while I am busy
looking about and I am waiting, expecting.... What? I do not know.
So I was very glad when I saw the brownish-pink gills enter my room,
heartily glad I may say. She sat down and innocently smoothed a fold
of her unif that fell between her knees, and very soon she pasted
upon me, all over me, a host of smiles,--a bit of a smile on each
crack of my face and this gave me pleasant sensations, as if I were
tightly bound like an infant of the ancients in a swaddling-cloth.

"Imagine! Today, when I entered the classroom" (she works in the
Child-Educational Refinery), "I suddenly noticed a caricature upon
the blackboard. Indeed! I assure you! They had pictured me in the
form of a fish! Perhaps I really--"

"No, no! Why do you say that?" I hastily exclaimed. When one was
near her, it was clear indeed that she had nothing resembling
gills. No. When I referred to gills in these pages I was certainly
irreverent.

"Oh, after all it does not matter. But the act as such, think of
it! Of course I called the Guardians at once. I love children very
much and I think that the most difficult and the most exalted love
is--cruelty. You understand me, of course."

"Certainly!" Her sentence so closely resembled my thoughts! I could
not refrain from reading to her a passage from my Record No. 20,
beginning "Quietly, metallically, distinctly, do the thoughts" ...
etc. I felt her brownish-pink cheeks twitching and coming closer
and closer to me. Suddenly I felt in my hands her firm, dry, even
slightly prickling fingers.

"Give, give this to me please. I shall have it phonographed and make
the children learn it by heart. Not only your Venerians need all
this, but we ourselves right now, tomorrow, day-after-tomorrow."

She glanced around and said in a very low voice:

"Have you heard, they say that on the Day of Unanimity--"

I sprang to my feet.

"What? What do they say? What--on the Day of Unanimity?"

The coziness of my room, its very walls, seemed to have vanished. I
felt myself thrown outside, where the tremendous, shaggy wind was
tossing about and where the slanting clouds of dusk were descending
lower and lower....

U- boldly and firmly grasped me by the shoulders. I even noticed how
her fingers, responding to my emotion, trembled slightly.

"Sit down, dear, and don't be upset. They say many things; must we
believe them all? Moreover, if only you need me, I shall be near you
on that day. I shall leave the school-children with someone else and
I shall stay with you, for you, dear, you too are a child and you
need...."

"No, no!" (I raised my hands in protest). "Not for anything! You
really think then that I am a child and that I cannot do without
a.... Oh, no! Not for anything in the world." (I must confess I had
other plans for that day!)

She smiled. The wording of that smile apparently was: "Oh, what a
stubborn, what a stubborn boy!" She sat down, eyelids lowered. Her
hands modestly busied themselves with fixing the fold of the unif
which fell again between her knees, and suddenly, about something
entirely different, she said:

"I think I must decide ... for your sake.... But I implore you, do
not hurry me. I must think it over."

I did not hurry her, although I realized that I ought to have been
delighted, as there is no greater honor than to crown someone's
evening years.

... All night strange wings were about. I walked and protected my
head with my hands from those wings. And a chair, not like ours, but
an ancient chair, came in with a horse-like gait: first the right
fore- and left hind-leg, then the left fore- and right hind-leg. It
rushed to my bed and crawled into it, and I liked that wooden chair,
although it made me uncomfortable and caused me some pain.

It is very strange; is it really impossible to find any cure for
this dream-sickness, or to make it rational, perhaps even useful?




RECORD TWENTY-TWO

  The Benumbed Waves
  Everything Is Improving
  I Am a Microbe


Please imagine that you stand at the seashore. The waves go
rhythmically up, down, up.... Suddenly when they have risen they
remain in that position, benumbed, torpid! It was just as weird
and unnatural when everything became confused and our regular walk
which is prescribed by the Tables, suddenly came to an end. The
last time such a thing happened was 119 years ago, when according
to our historians a meteorite fell hissing and fuming into the
very midst of the marchers. We were walking yesterday as usual,
that is like warriors on the Assyrian monuments, a thousand heads
and two composite, integrated legs and two swinging integrated
arms. At the end of the avenue where the Accumulating Tower was
formidably resounding, a quadrangle appeared: on the sides, in
front and behind--guards; in the centre three Numbers. Their unifs
were already stripped of the golden State badges; everything was
painfully clear. The enormous dial on the top of the Tower looked
like a face; it bent down from the clouds and spitting down its
seconds, it waited with indifference. It showed six minutes past
thirteen exactly. There was some confusion in the quadrangle. I was
very close and I saw the most minute details. I clearly remember
a thin, long neck and on the temple a confused net of small blue
veins like rivers on the map of a small unfamiliar world, and that
unknown world was apparently still a very young man. He evidently
noticed someone in our ranks; he stopped, rose upon his tip-toes
and stretched his neck. One of the guards snapped his back with
the bluish spark of the electric whip--he squealed in a thin voice
like a puppy. The distinct snaps followed each other at intervals
of approximately two seconds; a snap and a squeal, a snap and a
squeal.... We continued to walk as usual, rhythmically, in our
Assyrian manner. I watched the graceful zigzags of the electric
sparks and thought: "Human society is constantly improving, as it
should. How ugly a tool was the ancient whip and how much beauty
there is--"

At that moment, like a nut flying from a wheel revolving at full
speed, a female Number, thin, flexible and tense, tore herself
from our rows, and with a cry, "Enough! Don't you dare!" she threw
herself straight into the quadrangle. It was like the meteorite of
119 years ago; our march came to a standstill and our rows appeared
like the gray crests of waves frozen by sudden cold. For a second
I looked at that woman's figure with the eye of a stranger as all
the others did. She was no Number any longer; she was only a human
being and she existed for us only as a substantiation of the insult
which she cast upon the United State. But a motion of hers, her
bending while twisting to the left upon her hips, revealed to me
clearly who she was. I knew, I knew that body, flexible as a whip!
My eyes, my lips, my hands knew it; at that moment I was absolutely
certain.... Two of the guards dashed to catch her. One more moment
and that limpid mirror-like point on the pavement would have become
the point of meeting of their trajectories, and she would have been
caught! My heart fell, stopped. Without thinking whether it was
permissible or not, whether it was reasonable or absurd, I threw
myself straight to that point.

I felt thousands of eyes bulging with horror fixed upon me but that
only added a sort of desperately joyful power to that wild being
with hairy paws which arose in me and ran faster and faster. Two
more steps--she turned around--

I saw a quivering face covered with freckles, red eyebrows.... It
was not she! Not I-330!

A rabid, quivering joy took hold of me. I wanted to shout something
like: "Catch her! Get her, that--" But I heard only my whisper. A
heavy hand was already upon my shoulder; I was caught and led away.
I tried to explain to them:

"But listen, you must understand that I thought that...."

But could I explain even to myself all the sickness which I have
described in these pages? My light went out; I waited obediently. As
a leaf that is torn from its branch by a sudden gust of wind falls
humbly, but on its way down turns and tries to catch every little
branch, every fork, every knot; so I tried to catch every one of the
silent, globe-like heads, or the transparent ice of the walls, or
the blue needle of the Accumulating Tower which seemed to pierce the
clouds.

At that moment, when a heavy curtain was about to separate from me
this beautiful world, I noticed not far away a familiar, enormous
head gliding over the mirror surface of the pavement and wagging its
wing-like ears. I heard a familiar, flat voice:

"I deem it my duty to testify that Number D-503 is ill and is unable
to regulate his emotions. Moreover, I am sure that he was led by
natural indignation--"

"Yes! Yes!" I exclaimed, "I even shouted 'catch her!'"

From behind me: "You did not shout anything."

"No, but I wanted to. I swear by the Well-Doer, I wanted to!"

For a second I was bored through by the gray, cold, drill-eyes.
I don't know whether he believed that what I said was the truth
(almost!), or whether he had some secret reason for sparing me for a
while, but he wrote a short note, handed it to one of those who had
held me and again I was free. That is, I was again included in the
orderly, endless, Assyrian rows of Numbers.

The quadrangle, the freckled face and the temple with the map of
blue veinlets disappeared forever around the corner. We walked
again--a million-headed body; and in each one of us resided that
humble joyfulness with which in all probability molecules, atoms and
phagocytes live.

In the ancient days the Christians understood this feeling; they are
our only (though very imperfect) direct forerunners. The greatness
of the "Church of the United Flock" was known to them. They knew
that resignation is virtue, and pride--a vice; that "We" is from
God, "I" from the devil.

I was walking, keeping step with the others yet separated from them.
I was still trembling from the emotion just felt, like a bridge
over which a thundering ancient steel train has passed a moment
before. I _felt_ myself. To feel one's self, to be conscious of
one's personality, is the lot of an eye inflamed by a cinder, or an
infected finger, or a bad tooth. A healthy eye, or finger, or tooth
is not felt; it is non-existent as it were. Is it not clear then,
that consciousness of oneself is a sickness?

Apparently I am no longer a phagocyte which quietly, in a
business-like way devours microbes (microbes with freckled faces
and blue temples); apparently I am myself a microbe, and she too,
I-330, is a microbe, a wonderful, diabolic microbe! It is quite
possible that there are already thousands of such microbes among us,
still pretending to be phagocytes, as I pretend. What if today's
accident, although in itself not important, is only a beginning,
only the first meteorite of a shower of burning and thundering
stones which the infinite may have poured out upon our glass
paradise?




RECORD TWENTY-THREE

  Flowers
  The Dissolution of a Crystal
  If only (?)


They say there are flowers that bloom only once in a hundred years.
Why not suppose the existence of flowers that bloom only once a
thousand years? We may have known nothing about them until now only
because today is the "once in a thousand years"?

Happy and dizzy I walked downstairs to the controller on duty
and quickly under my gaze all around me and silently the
thousand-year-old buds burst, and everything was blooming:
armchairs, shoes, golden badges, electric bulbs, someone's dark
heavy eyes, the polished columns of the banisters, the handkerchief
which someone lost on the stairs, the small, ink-blotted desk of the
controller and the tender brown, somewhat freckled cheeks of U-.
Everything seemed not ordinary, new, tender, rosy, moist. U- took
the pink stub from me while the blue, aromatic moon, hanging from an
unseen branch, shone through the glass of the wall and over the head
of U-. With a solemn gesture I pointed my finger and said:

"The moon. You see?"

U- glanced at me, then at the number of the stub and again made that
familiar, charmingly innocent movement with which she fixes the fold
of the unif between her knees.

"You look abnormal and ill, dear. Abnormality and illness are the
same thing. You are killing yourself. And no one would tell you
that, no one!"

That "No one" was certainly equivalent to the number on the
stub,--I-330. This thought was confirmed by an ink-blot which
fell close to the figure 330. Dear, wonderful U-! You are right,
of course. I am not reasonable. I am sick. I have a soul. I am a
microbe. But is blooming--not a sickness? Is it not painful when the
buds are bursting? And don't you think that spermatozoa are the most
terrible of all microbes?

Back upstairs to my room. In the widely open cup of the armchair
was I-330. I, on the floor, embracing her limbs, my head on her
lap. We were silent. Everything was silent. Only the pulse was
audible. Like a crystal I was _dissolving_ in her, in I-330. I
felt most distinctly how the polished facets which limited me in
space were slowly thawing, melting away. I was dissolving in her
lap, in her, and I became at once smaller and larger and larger,
unembraceable. For she was not she but the whole universe. For a
second I and that armchair near the bed, transfixed with joy, we
were one. And the wonderfully smiling old woman at the gate of the
Ancient House, and the wild debris beyond the Green Wall, and some
strange silver wreckage on a black background, dozing like the old
woman and the slam of a door in the distance,--all this was within
me, was listening to my pulse and soaring through the happiest of
seconds.

In absurd, confused, overflowing words I attempted to tell her that
I was a crystal and that there was a door in me, and that I felt how
happy the armchair was. But something nonsensical came out of the
attempt and I stopped. I was ashamed. And suddenly:

"Dear I-! Forgive me! I understand nothing. I talk so foolishly!"

"And why should you think that foolishness is not fine? If we had
taken pains to educate human foolishness through centuries, as
we have done with our intelligence, it might perhaps have been
transformed into something very precious."

Yes, I think she is right! How could she be wrong at that moment?

"... And for this foolishness of yours and for what you did
yesterday during the walk, I love you the more, much more."

"Then why did you torture me? Why would you not come? Why did you
send me the pink check and make me--?"

"Perhaps I wanted to test you. Perhaps I must be sure that you will
do anything I wish, that you are completely mine."

"Yes, completely."

She took my face, my whole self, between her palms, lifted my head:

"And how about 'It is the duty of every honest Number'? Eh?"

Sweet, sharp, white teeth,--a smile. In the open cup of the armchair
she was like a bee,--sting and honey combined.

Yes, duty.... I turned over in my mind the pages of my records;
indeed there is not a thought about the fact that strictly speaking
I should....

I was silent. Exaltedly (and probably stupidly) I smiled, looking
into the pupils of her eyes. I followed first one eye and then
the other and in each of them I saw myself, a millimetric self
imprisoned in those tiny rainbow cells. Then again the lips and the
sweet pain of blooming.

In each Number of the United State there is an unseen metronome
which tick-tocks silently; without looking at the clock we know
exactly the time of day within five minutes. But now my metronome
had stopped and I did not know how much time had passed. In fright
I grasped my badge with its clock from under the pillow. Glory be
to the Well-Doer! I had twenty minutes more! But those minutes were
such tiny, short ones! They ran! And I wanted to tell her so many
things. I wanted to tell her all about myself; about the letter from
O- and about that terrible evening when I gave her a child; and for
some reason also about my childhood, about our mathematician Plappa
and about the square-root of minus one; and how, when I attended
the glorification on the Day of Unanimity for the first time in my
life, I wept bitterly because there was an ink-stain on my unif--on
such a holy day!

I-330 lifted her head. She leaned on her elbow. In the corners
of her lips two long, sharp lines and the dark angle of lifted
eyebrows--a cross.

"Perhaps on that day ..." her brow grew darker; she took my hand and
pressed it hard. "Tell me, will you ever forget me? Will you always
remember me?"

"But why such talk? What is it, I-, dear?"

She was silent. And her eyes were already sliding past me, through
me, away into the distance. I suddenly heard the wind beating the
glass with its enormous wings. Of course it had been blowing all the
while but I had not noticed it until then. And for some reason those
cawing birds over the Green Wall came to my mind.

I-330 shook her head with a gesture of throwing something off. Once
more she touched me for a second with her whole body, as an aero
before landing touches the ground for a second with all the tension
of a recoiling spring.

"Well, give me my stockings, quick!"

The stockings were on the desk, on the open manuscript, on page 124.
Being in haste I caught some of the pages and they were scattered
over the floor so that it was hard to put them back in the proper
order. Moreover, even if I put them in that order there will be no
real order; there are obstacles to that anyway, some undiscoverable
unknowns.

"I can't bear it," I said, "You are here, near me, yet you seem to
be behind an opaque ancient wall; through that wall I hear a rustle
and voices; I cannot make out the words, I don't know what is there.
I cannot bear it. You seem always to withhold something from me; you
have never told me what kind of a place it was where I found myself
that day beneath the Ancient House. Where did those corridors lead?
Why was the doctor there,--or perhaps all that never happened?"

I-330 put her hands on my shoulders and slowly entered deeply into
my eyes.

"You want to know all?"

"Yes, I do."

"And you would not be afraid to follow me anywhere? Wherever I
should lead you?"

"Anywhere!"

"All right then. I promise you, after the holiday, if only.... Oh
yes, there is your _Integral_. I always forget to ask; will it soon
be completed?"

"No. 'If only' what? Again! 'If only' what?"

She, already at the door: "You shall see."

I was again alone. All that she left behind her was a barely
perceptible scent, similar to that of a sweet, dry, yellow dust of
flowers from behind the Green Wall; also, sunk deeply within me,
question marks like small hooks similar to those the ancients used
for fishing (_vide_ the Prehistoric Museum).

... Why did she suddenly ask about the _Integral_?




RECORD TWENTY-FOUR

  The Limit of the Function
  Easter
  To Cross Out Everything


I am like a motor set in motion at a speed of too many revolutions
per second, the bearings have become too hot and in one more minute
the molten metal will begin to drip and everything will go to the
devil. Cold water! Quick! Some logic! I pour pailfuls of it, but my
logic merely sizzles on the hot metal and disappears in the air in
the form of vapor.

Of course it is clear that in order to establish the true meaning
of a function, one must establish its limit. It is also clear that
yesterday's "dissolution in the universe" taken to its limit is
death. For death is exactly the most complete dissolution of the
self in the universe. Hence: L=f(D), love is the function of
death.

Yes, exactly, exactly! That is why I am afraid of I-330; I struggle
against her, I don't want.... But why is it that within me "I don't
want to" and "I want to" stand side by side? That is the chief
horror of the matter; I continue to long for that happy death of
yesterday. The horror of it is that even now, when I have integrated
the logical function, when it becomes evident that the latter
contains death hidden in it, nevertheless I long for it with my
lips, arms, breast, with every millimeter....

Tomorrow is the Day of Unanimity. She will certainly be there and I
shall see her, though from a distance. That distance will be painful
to me, for I must be, I am inevitably drawn, close to her, so that
her hands, her shoulder, her hair.... I long for even that pain....
Let it come.... Great Well-Doer! How absurd to desire pain! Who is
ignorant of the simple fact that pains are negative items which
reduce that sum total we call happiness? Consequently ... Well, no
"consequently" ... Emptiness.... Nakedness!

_The Same Evening._

Through the glass wall of the house I see a disquieting, windy,
feverishly pink, sunset. I move my armchair to avoid that pinkness
and turn over these pages, and I find I am forgetting that I write
this not for myself but for you unknown people whom I love and pity,
for you who still lag centuries behind, below. Let me tell you about
the Day of Unanimity, about that Great Day. I think that day for us
is what Easter was for the ancients. I remember I used to prepare an
hour-calendar the eve of that day; solemnly I would cross out every
time the figure of the hour elapsed; nearer by one hour! one hour
less to wait!... If I were certain that nobody would discover it, I
assure you I should now too, make out such a calendar and carry it
with me, and I should watch how many hours remain until tomorrow,
when I shall see, at least from a distance....

(I was interrupted. They brought me a new unif from the shop. As is
customary, new unifs are given to us for tomorrow's celebration.
Steps in the hall, exclamations of joy, noises.)

I shall continue; tomorrow I shall see the same spectacle which we
see year after year and which always awakes in us fresh emotions,
as though we saw it for the first time: an impressive throng of
piously lifted arms. Tomorrow is the day of the yearly election of
the Well-Doer. Tomorrow we shall again hand over to our Well-Doer
the keys to the impregnable fortress of our happiness. Certainly
this in no way resembles the disorderly, unorganized election-days
of the ancients, on which (it seems so funny!) they did not even
know in advance the result of the election. To build a state on some
non-discountable contingencies, to build blindly,--what could be
more nonsensical? Yet centuries were required to pass before this
was understood!

Needless to say, we in this respect as in all others have no place
for contingencies; nothing unexpected can happen. The elections
themselves have rather a symbolic meaning. They remind us that we
are a united, powerful organism of millions of cells, that--, to
use the language of the "gospel" of the ancients, we are a united
church. The history of the United State knows not a single case
in which upon this solemn day even a solitary voice has dared to
violate the magnificent unison.

They say that the ancients used to conduct their elections secretly,
stealthily like thieves. Some of our historians assert even that
they would come to the electoral celebrations completely masked.
Imagine the weird, fantastic spectacle! Night. A plaza. Along the
walls the stealthily creeping figures covered with mantles. The
red flame of torches dancing in the wind.... Why was such secrecy
necessary? It has never been satisfactorily explained. Probably it
resulted from the fact that elections were associated with some
mystic and superstitious, perhaps even criminal ceremonies. We have
nothing to conceal or to be ashamed of; we celebrate our election
openly, honestly, in daylight. I see them all vote for the Well-Doer
and everybody sees me vote for the Well-Doer. How could it be
otherwise, since "all" and "I" are one "we"? How ennobling, sincere,
lofty, is this compared with the cowardly, thievish "secrecy" of the
ancients! Moreover, how much more expedient! For even admitting for
a moment the impossible, that is the outbreak of some dissonance in
our customary unity, in that case our unseen Guardians are always
right there among us, are they not, to register the Numbers who
would fall into error and save them from any further false steps?
The United State is theirs, the Numbers'! And besides....

Through the wall to my left a she-number before the mirror-door
of the closet; she is hastily unbuttoning her unif. For a second,
swiftly--eyes, lips, two sharp, pink ... the curtains fell. Within
me instantly awoke all that happened yesterday and now I no longer
know what I meant to say by "besides...." I no longer wish to;--I
cannot. I want one thing. I want I-330. I want her every minute,
every second, to be with me, with no one else. All that I wrote
about Unanimity is of no value; it is not what I want; I have a
desire to cross it out, to tear it to pieces and throw it away. For
I know (be it a sacrilege, yet it is the truth), that a glorious Day
is possible only with her and only then when we are side by side,
shoulder to shoulder. Without her the Sun of tomorrow will appear
to me only as a little circle cut out of a tin sheet, and the sky a
sheet of tin painted blue, and I myself ... I snatched the telephone
receiver.

"I-330, are you there?"

"Yes, it is I. Why so late?"

"Perhaps not too late yet. I want to ask you ... I want you to be
with me tomorrow--dear!"

"Dear" I said in a very low voice. And for some reason a thing I
saw this morning at the docks flashed through my mind: just for
fun someone put a watch under the hundred-ton sledge-hammer....
A swing, a breath of wind in the face and the silent hundred-ton,
knife-like weight on the breakable watch....

A silence. I thought I heard someone's whisper in I-330's room. Then
her voice:

"No, I cannot. Of course you understand that I myself.... No, I
cannot. 'Why?' You shall see tomorrow."

Night.




RECORD TWENTY-FIVE

  The Descent from Heaven
  The Greatest Catastrophe in History
  The Known--Is Ended


At the beginning all arose, and the hymn, like a solemn mantle,
slowly waved above our heads. Hundreds of tubes of the Musical Tower
and millions of human voices. For a second I forgot everything; I
forgot that alarming something at which I-330 hinted in connection
with today's celebration; I think I even forgot about her. At that
moment I was the very same little boy who once wept because of a
tiny ink-stain on his unif, which no one else could see. Even if it
be so, if nobody sees that I am covered with black, ineffaceable
stains, I know it, do I not? I know that there should be no place
for a criminal like me among these frank open faces. What if I
should rush forward and shout out all at once everything about
myself! The end might follow. Let it! At least for a second I would
feel myself clear and clean and senseless like that innocent blue
sky....

All eyes were directed upward; in the pure morning blue, still moist
with the tears of night, a small dark spot appeared. Now it was
dark, now bathed in the rays of the sun. It was He, descending to
us from the sky, He--the new Jehovah--in an aero, He, as wise and as
lovingly cruel as the Jehovah of the ancients. Nearer and nearer,
and higher toward him were drawn millions of hearts. Already he
saw us. And in my mind with Him I looked over everything from the
heights: concentric circles of stands marked with dotted blue lines
of unifs,--like circles of a spider-web strewn with microscopic suns
(the shining of the badges). And in the centre there soon the wise
white spider would occupy his place--the Well-Doer clad in white,
the Well-Doer who wisely tangled our hands and feet in the salutary
net of happiness.

His magnificent descent from the sky was accomplished. The brassy
Hymn came to silence; all sat down. At once I perceived that
everything was really a very thin spider-web, the threads of which
were stretched tense and trembling, and it seemed that in a moment
those threads might break and something improbable....

I half rose and looked around, and I met many lovingly-worried eyes
which passed from one face to another. I saw someone lifting his
hand and almost imperceptibly waving his fingers--he was making
signs to another. The latter replied with a similar finger-sign. And
a third.... I understood; they were the Guardians. I understood;
they were alarmed by something--the spider-web was stretched and
trembling. And within me as if tuned to the same wave-length of a
radio, within me there was a corresponding quiver.

On the platform a poet was reciting his pre-electoral ode. I could
not hear a single word; I only felt the rhythmic swing of the
hexametric pendulum, and with its every motion I felt how nearer and
nearer there was approaching some hour set for.... I continued to
turn over face after face like pages but I could not find the one,
the only one, I was seeking, the one I needed to find at once, as
soon as possible, for one more swing of the pendulum and....

It was he, certainly it was he! Below, past the main platform,
gliding over the sparkling glass, the ear-wings flapped by, the
running body gave a reflection of a double-curved S-, like a noose
which was rolling toward some of the intricate passages among the
stands. S-, I-330,--there is some thread between them. I have always
felt some thread between them. I don't know yet what that thread is
but some day I shall untangle it. I planted my gaze on him; he was
rushing farther away, behind him that invisible thread.... There he
stopped ... there.... I was pierced, twisted together into a knot as
if by a lightning-like, many-volted electric discharge; in my row,
not more than 40° from me, S- stopped and bowed. I saw I-330 and
beside her the smiling, repellent, negro-lipped R-13.

My first thought was to rush to her and cry, "Why with him? Why did
you not want...?" But the salutary invisible spider-web bound fast
my hands and feet; so, gritting my teeth together I sat stiff as
iron, my gaze fixed upon them. A sharp _physical_ pain at my heart.
I remember my thought: "if non-physical causes effect physical pain,
then it is clear that...."

I regret that I did not come to any conclusion. I remember only that
something about "soul" flashed through my mind, a purely nonsensical
ancient expression, "His soul fell into his boots" passed through my
head. My heart sank. The hexameter came to an end. It was about to
start. What "It"?

The five minute pre-election recess established by custom. The
custom-established pre-electional silence. But now it was not that
pious, really prayer-like silence that it usually was. Now it was
as in the ancient days when there were no Accumulating Towers,
when the sky, still untamed in those days, would roar from time to
time with its "storms." It was like the "lull before the storm"
of the ancient days. The air seemed to be made of transparent,
vaporized cast-iron. One wanted to breathe with one's mouth wide
open. My hearing, intense to painfulness, registered from behind a
mouse-like, gnawing, worried whisper. Without lifting my eyes I saw
those two, I-330 and R-13, side by side, shoulder to shoulder,--and
on my knees my trembling, foreign, hateful, hairy hands....

Everybody was holding a badge with a clock in his hands. One....
Two.... Three.... Five minutes. From the main platform a cast-iron,
slow voice:

"Those in favor shall lift their hands."

If only I dared to look straight into his eyes as formerly! Straight
and devotedly, and think: "Here I am, my whole self! Take me!" But
now I did not dare. I had to make an effort to raise my hand, as if
my joints were rusty.

A whisper of millions of hands. Someone's subdued "Ah!" and I felt
something was coming, falling heavily, but I could not understand
what it was, and I did not have the strength or courage to take a
look....

"Those opposed?"...

This was always the most magnificent moment of our celebration: all
would remain sitting motionless, joyfully bowing their heads under
the salutary yoke of that Number of Numbers. But now, to my horror
again I heard a rustle; light as a sigh, yet it was more distinct
even than the brass tube of the Hymn. Thus the last sigh in a man's
life, around him people with their faces pale and with drops of cold
sweat upon their foreheads.... I lifted my eyes and....

It took one hundredth of a second only; I saw thousands of hands
arise "opposed" and fall back. I saw the pale cross-marked face of
I-330 and her lifted hand. Darkness came upon my eyes.

Another hundredth of a second, silence. Quiet. The pulse. Then, as
if at the sign of some mad conductor, from all the stands rattling,
shouting, a whirlwind of unifs lifted by the rush, the perplexed
figures of the Guardians running to and fro. Someone's heels in
the air near my eyes and close to those heels someone's wide-open
mouth tearing itself by an inaudible scream. For some reason this
picture remains particularly distinct in my memory: thousands of
mouths noiselessly yelling as if on the screen of a monstrous
cinema. Also as if on a screen, somewhere below at a distance, for a
second--O-90, pressed against the wall in a passage, her lips white,
defending her abdomen with her crossed arms. She disappeared as if
washed away by a wave, or else I simply forgot her because....

This not on the screen any more but within me, within my compressed
heart, within the rapidly pulsating temples; over my head, somewhat
to the left, R-13 suddenly jumped upon a bench, all sprinkling, red,
rabid. In his arms was I-330, pale, her unif torn from shoulder to
breast, red blood on white. She firmly held him round the neck, and
he with huge leaps from bench to bench, repellent and agile, like a
gorilla, was carrying her away upward.

As if it were in a fire of ancient days, everything became red
around me. Only one thing in my head: to jump after them, to catch
them. At this moment I cannot explain to myself the source of that
strength within me, but like a battering-ram I broke through the
crowd, over somebody's shoulders, over a bench and I was there in a
moment and caught R-13 by the collar:

"Don't you dare! Don't you dare, I say! Immediately--"

Fortunately no one could hear my voice, as everyone was shouting and
running.

"Who is it? What is the matter? What--" R-13 turned around; his
sprinkling lips were trembling. He apparently thought it was one of
the Guardians.

"What? I do not want--I won't allow--Put her down at once!"

But he only sprinkled angrily with his lips, shook his head and ran
on. Then I ... I am terribly ashamed to write all this down but I
believe I must, so that you, my unknown readers, may make a complete
study of my disease.... Then I hit him over the head with all my
might. You understand? I hit him. This I remember distinctly. I
remember also a feeling of liberation that followed my action, a
feeling of lightness in my whole body.

I-330 slid quickly out of his arms.

"Go away!" she shouted to R-, "Don't you see that he--? Go!"

R-13 showed his white negro teeth, sprinkled into my face some word,
dived down and disappeared. And I picked up I-330, pressed her
firmly to myself and carried her away.

My heart was beating forcibly. It seemed enormous. And with every
beat it would splash out such a thundering, such a hot, such a
joyful wave! A flash: "Let them, below there, let them toss and rush
and yell and fall; what matter if something has fallen, if something
has been shattered to dust?-- Little matter! Only to remain this way
and carry her, carry and carry...."

_The Same Evening, Twenty-two o'Clock._

I hold my pen with great difficulty. Such an extraordinary fatigue
after all the dizzying events of this morning. Is it possible that
the strong, salutary, centuries-old walls of the United State have
fallen? Is it possible that we are again without a roof over our
heads, back in the wild state of freedom like our remote ancestors?
Is it possible that we have lost our Well-Doer? "Opposed!" On the
Day of Unanimity--opposed! I am ashamed of _them_, painfully,
fearfully ashamed.... But who are "they"? And who am I? "They,"
"We"...? Do I know?

I shall continue.

She was sitting where I had brought her on the uppermost glass bench
which was hot from the sun. Her right shoulder and the beginning of
the wonderful and incalculable curve were uncovered,--an exceedingly
thin serpent of blood. She seemed not to be aware of the blood, or
that her breast was uncovered. No, I will say rather: she seemed
to see all that and seemed to feel that it was essential to her,
that if her unif were buttoned she would have torn it, she would
have....

"And tomorrow!" She breathed the words through sparkling white
clenched teeth, "Tomorrow, nobody knows what ... do you understand?
Neither I nor anyone else knows; it is unknown! Do you realize what
a joy it is? Do you realize that all that was certain has come to an
end? Now ... things will be new, improbable, unforeseen!"

Below the human waves were still foaming, tossing, roaring, but they
seemed to be very far away, and to be growing more and more distant.
For she was looking at me. She slowly drew me into herself through
the narrow, golden windows of her pupils. We thus remained silent
for a long while. And for some reason I recalled how once I watched
some queer yellow pupils through the Green Wall, while above the
Wall birds were soaring (or was this another time?).

"Listen, if nothing particular happens tomorrow, I shall take you
there; do you understand?"

No, I did not understand but I nodded in silence. I was dissolved, I
became infinitesimal, a geometrical point....

After all, there is some logic,--a peculiar logic of today, in this
state of being a point. A point has more unknowns than any other
entity. If a point should start to move, it might become thousands
of curves, or hundreds of solids.

I was afraid to budge. What might I have become if I had moved? It
seemed to me that everybody like myself was afraid now of even the
most minute of motions.

At this moment, for instance, as I sit and write, everyone is
sitting hidden in his glass cell, expecting something. I do not hear
the buzzing of the elevators, usual at this hour, or laughter or
steps, from time to time Numbers pass in couples through the hall,
whispering, on tip-toe....

What will happen tomorrow? What will become of me tomorrow?




RECORD TWENTY-SIX

  The World Does Exist
  Rash
  Forty-one Degrees Centigrade


Morning. Through the ceiling the sky is as usual firm, round,
red-cheeked. I think I should have been less surprised had I found
above some extraordinary quadrangular sun, or people clad in
many-colored dresses made of the skins of animals, or opaque walls
of stone. Then the world, _our world_, does still exist? Or is it
only inertia? Is the generator already switched out, while the
armature is still roaring and revolving;--two more revolutions, or
three, and at the fourth will it die away?

Are you familiar with that strange state in which you wake up in
the middle of the night, open your eyes into the darkness and then
suddenly feel you are lost in the dark; you quickly, quickly begin
to feel around, to seek something familiar and solid, a wall, a
lamp, a chair? In exactly the same way I felt around, seeking in the
Journal of the United State; quickly, quickly--I found this:

"The celebration of the Day of Unanimity, long awaited by all,
took place yesterday. The same Well-Doer who so often proved his
unshakeable wisdom, was unanimously re-elected for the forty-eighth
time. The celebration was clouded by a little confusion, created by
the enemies of happiness, who by their action naturally lost the
right to be the bricks for the foundation of the renovated United
State. It is clear to everybody that to take into consideration
their votes would mean to consider as a part of a magnificent,
heroic symphony the accidental cough of a sick person who happened
to be in a concert hall."

Oh, great Sage! Is it really true that despite everything we are
saved? What objection indeed can one find to this most crystalline
syllogism? And further on a few more lines:

"Today at twelve o'clock a joint meeting of the Administrative
Bureau, Medical Bureau, and Bureau of Guardians will take place. An
important State decree is to be expected shortly."

No, the Walls still stand erect. Here they are! I can feel them. And
that strange feeling of being lost somewhere, of not knowing where
I am--that feeling is gone. I am not surprised any longer to see
the sky blue and the sun round and all the Numbers going to work as
usual....

I walked along the avenue with a particularly firm resounding step.
It seemed to me that everyone else walked exactly like me. But at
the crossing, on turning the corner, I noticed people strangely
shying away, going around the corner of a building sidewise, as if a
pipe had burst in the wall, as if cold water were spurting like a
fountain on the sidewalk and it was impossible to cross it.

Another five or ten steps and I too felt a spurt of cold water
that struck me and threw me from the sidewalk; at a height of
approximately two meters a quadrangular piece of paper was pasted to
the wall and on that sheet of paper,--unintelligible, poisonously
green letters:

_MEPHI_

And under the paper,--an S-like curved back and wing-ears shaking
with anger or emotion. His right arm lifted as high as possible, his
left arm hopelessly stretched out backward like a hurt wing, he was
trying to jump high enough to reach the paper and tear it off but he
was unable to do so. He was a fraction of an inch too short.

Probably every one of the passers-by had the same thought: "If I go
to help him, I, only one of the many, will he not think that I am
guilty of something and that I am therefore anxious to...."

I must confess, I had that thought. But remembering how many times
he had proved my real Guardian-angel and how often he had saved
me, I stepped towards him and with courage and warm assurance I
stretched out my hand and tore off the sheet. S- turned around. The
little drills sank quickly into me to the bottom and found something
there. Then he lifted his left brow, winked toward the wall where
"Mephi" had been hanging a minute ago. The tail of his little smile
twinkled even with a certain pleasure which greatly surprised me.
But why should I be surprised? A doctor always prefers a temperature
of 40°C. and a rash to the slow, languid rise of the temperature
during the period of incubation of a disease; it enables him to
determine the character of the disease. _Mephi_ broke out today on
the walls like a rash. I understood his smile.

In the passage to the underground railway, under our feet on the
clean glass of the steps again a white sheet: _Mephi_. And also on
the walls of the tunnel and on the benches and on the mirror of
the car. (Apparently pasted on in haste as some were hanging on a
slant.) Everywhere the same white gruesome rash.

I must confess that the exact meaning of that smile became clear to
me only after many days which were overfilled with the strangest and
most unexpected events.

The roaring of the wheels, distinct in the general silence, seemed
to be the noise of infected streams of blood. Some Number was
inadvertently touched on the shoulder and he started so that a
package of papers fell out of his hands. To my left another Number
was reading a paper, his eyes fixed always on the same line; the
paper perceptibly trembled in his hands. I felt that everywhere, in
the wheels, in the hands, in the newspapers, even in the eyelashes,
the pulse was becoming more and more rapid and I thought it
probable that today when I-330 and I should find ourselves _there_,
the temperature would rise to 39°, 40°, perhaps 41° and....

At the docks--the same silence filled with the buzzing of an
invisible propeller. The lathes were silent as if brooding. Only
the cranes were moving almost inaudibly as if on tip-toe, gliding,
bending over, picking up with their tentacles the lumps of frozen
air and loading the tanks of the _Integral_. We are already
preparing the _Integral_ for a trial flight.

"Well, shall we have her up in a week?" This was my question
addressed to the Second Builder. His face is like porcelain, painted
with sweet blue and tender pink little flowers (eyes and lips), but
today those little flowers looked faded and washed-out. We were
counting aloud when suddenly I broke off in the midst of a word and
stopped, my mouth wide open; above the cupola, above the blue lump
lifted by the crane, there was a scarcely noticeable small white
square. I felt my whole body trembling--perhaps with laughter.
Yes! _I myself heard_ my own laughter. (Did you ever hear your own
laughter?)

"No, listen," I said. "Imagine you are in an ancient aeroplane. The
altimeter shows 5000 meters. A wing breaks; you are dashing down
like.... And on the way you calculate: 'Tomorrow from twelve to
two ... from two to six ... and dinner at five!' Would it not be
absurd?"

The little blue flowers began to move and bulge out. What if I were
made of glass and he could have seen what was going on within me at
that moment? If he knew that some three or four hours later....




RECORD TWENTY-SEVEN

No Headings. It Is Impossible!


I was alone in the endless corridors. In those same corridors.... A
mute, concrete sky. Water was dripping somewhere upon a stone. The
familiar heavy opaque door,--and the subdued noise from behind it.

She said she would come out at sixteen sharp. It was already five
minutes, then ten, then fifteen past sixteen. No one appeared. For a
second I was my former self, horrified at the thought that the door
might open.

"Five minutes more, and if she does not come out...."

Water was dripping somewhere upon a stone. No one about. With
melancholy pleasure I felt: "saved," and slowly I turned and walked
back along the corridor. The trembling dots of the small lamps on
the ceiling became dimmer and dimmer. Suddenly a quick rattle of a
door behind me. Quick steps, softly echoing from the ceiling and the
walls. It was she, light as a bird, panting somewhat from running.

"I knew you would be here, you would come! I knew you,--you...."

The spears of her eyelashes moved apart to let me in and ... how can
I describe what effect that ancient, absurd and wonderful rite has
upon me when her lips touch mine? Can I find a formula to express
that whirlwind which sweeps out of my soul everything, everything
save her? Yes, yes from my _soul_. You may laugh at me if you will.

She made an effort to raise her eyelids and her slow words too came
with an effort:

"No. Now we must go."

The door opened. Old, worn steps. An unbearably multicolored noise,
whistling and light....

  * * * * *

Twenty-four hours have passed since then and everything seems to
have settled in me, yet it is most difficult for me to find words
for even an approximate description.... It is as though a bomb had
exploded in my head.... Open mouths, wings, shouts, leaves, words,
stones, all these one after another in a heap....

I remember my first thought was: "Fast--back!" For it was clear
to me that while I was waiting there in the corridors, _they_
somehow had blasted and destroyed the Green Wall, and from behind it
everything rushed in and splashed over our city which until then had
been kept clean of that lower world. I must have said something of
this sort to I-330. She laughed.

"No, we have simply come out _beyond the Green Wall_."

Then I opened my eyes, and close to me, actually, I saw those very
things which until then not a single living Number had ever seen
otherwise than depreciated a thousand times, dimmed and hazy through
the cloudy glass of the Wall.

The Sun,--it was no longer our light, evenly diffused over the
mirror surface of the pavements; it seemed an accumulation of living
fragments, of incessantly oscillating, dizzy spots which blinded
the eyes. And the trees! Like candles rising into the very sky,
or like spiders which squatted upon the earth, supported by their
clumsy paws, or like mute green fountains. And all this was moving,
jumping, rustling. Under my feet some strange little ball was
crawling.... I stood as though rooted to the ground. I was unable to
take a step because under my foot there was not an even plane, but
(imagine!), something disgustingly soft, yielding, living, springy,
green!...

I was dazed; I was strangled,--yes, strangled; it is the best word
to express my state. I stood holding fast with both hands to a
swinging branch.

"It is nothing. It is all right. It is natural,--for the first time.
It will pass. Courage!"

At I-330's side bouncing dizzily on a green net,--someone's thinnest
profile, cut out of paper. No, not "someone's." I recognized him. I
remembered. It was the doctor. I understood everything very clearly.
I realized that they both caught me beneath the arms and laughingly
dragged me forward. My legs twisted and glided.... Terrible noise,
cawing, stumps, yelling, branches, tree-trunks, wings, leaves,
whistling....

The trees ran apart. A bright clearing. In the clearing, people, or
perhaps to be more exact, _beings_. Now comes the most difficult
part to describe for _this_ was beyond any bounds of probability. It
is clear to me now why I-330 was stubbornly silent about it before;
I should not have believed it, should not have believed even her. It
is even possible that tomorrow I shall not believe myself, shall not
believe my own description in these pages.

In the clearing, around a naked, skull-like rock,--a noisy crowd
of three or four hundred ... people. Well, let's call them people.
I find it difficult to coin new words. Just as on the stands
you recognize in the general accumulation of faces only those
which are familiar to you, so at first I recognized only our
grayish-blue unifs. But one second later and I saw distinctly and
clearly among the unifs dark, red, golden, black, brown and white
humans--apparently they were humans. None of them had any clothes
on, and their bodies were covered with short, glistening hair, like
that which may be seen on the stuffed horse in the Prehistoric
Museum. But their females had faces exactly, yes exactly, like
the faces of our women: tender, rosy and not overgrown with hair.
Also their breasts were free of hair, firm breasts of wonderful
geometrical form. As to the males, only a part of their faces were
free from hair, like our ancestors', and the organs of reproduction,
similar to ours.

All this was so unbelievable, so unexpected, that I stood there
quietly (I assert positively that I stood quietly), and looked
around. Like a scale: overload one side sufficiently and then you
may gently put on the other as much as you will; the arrow will not
move.

Suddenly I felt alone. I-330 was no longer with me. I don't know how
nor where she disappeared. Around me were only _those_, with their
hair glistening like silk in the sunlight. I caught someone's warm,
strong, dark shoulder.

"Listen, please, in the name of the Well-Doer, could you tell me
where she went? A while, a minute ago she...."

Long-haired, austere eyebrows turned to me.

"Sh ... sh ... silence!" He made a sign with his head towards the
centre where there stood the yellow, skull-like stone.

There above the heads of all I saw her. The sun beat straight into
my eyes, and because of that she seemed coal-black, standing out
on the blue cloth of the sky,--a coal-black silhouette on a blue
background. A little higher the clouds were floating. And it seemed
that not the clouds but the rock itself, and she herself upon that
rock, and the crowd and the clearing,--all were silently floating
like a ship, and the earth was light and glided away from under the
feet....

"Brothers!" (It was she.) "Brothers, you all know that there inside
the Wall, in the City, they are building the _Integral_. And you
know also that the day has come for us to destroy that Wall and all
other walls, so that the green wind may blow all over the earth,
from end to end. But the _Integral_ is going to take these walls
up into the heights to the thousands of other worlds which every
evening whisper to us with their lights through the black leaves of
night...."

Waves and foam and wind were beating the rock:

"Down with the _Integral!_ Down!"

"No, brothers, not 'down'. The _Integral_ must be ours. And it
_shall_ be ours. On the day when it first sets sail into the sky,
_we_ shall be on board. For the Builder of the _Integral_ is with
us. He left the walls, he came with me here in order to be with us.
Long live the Builder!"

A second--and I was somewhere above everything. Under me: heads,
heads, heads, wide open yelling mouths, arms rising and falling....
There was something strange and intoxicating in it all. I felt
myself _above everybody_; I was,--I,--a separate world; I ceased to
be the usual item; I became unity....

Again I was below, near the rock, my body happy, shaken and rumpled,
as after an embrace of love. Sunlight, voices, and from above--the
smile of I-330. A golden-haired woman, her whole body silky-golden
and diffusing an odor of different herbs, was near by. She held a
cup, apparently made of wood. She drank a little from it with her
red lips and then offered the cup to me. I closed my eyes and with
avidity I drank the sweet cold prickly sparks, pouring them down on
the fire which burned within me.

Soon afterward my blood and the whole world began to circulate a
thousand times faster; the earth seemed to be flying, light as down.
And within me everything was simple, light and clear. Only then
I noticed on the rock the familiar, enormous letters: M E P H I,
and for some reason the inscription seemed to me _necessary_. It
seemed to be a simple thread binding everything together. A rather
rough picture hewn in the rock; this too, seemed comprehensible;
it represented a youth with wings and with a transparent body, and
in the place ordinarily occupied by the heart,--a blinding, red,
blazing coal. Again, I understood that coal, or no, I _felt_ it as
I felt without hearing every word of I-330 (she continued to speak
from above, from the rock), and I felt that all of them breathed one
breath and that they were all ready to fly somewhere like the birds
over the Wall.

From behind, from the confusion of breathing bodies,--a loud voice:

"But this is folly!"

It seems to me it was I, yes, I am certain it was I, who then jumped
on the rock; from there I saw the sun, heads, a green sea on a blue
background, and I cried:

"Yes, yes, precisely. All must become insane; we must become insane
as soon as possible! We must; I know it."

I-330 was at my side. Her smile--two dark lines from the angles of
her mouth directed upward.... And within me a blazing coal. It was
momentary, light, a little painful, beautiful.... And later,--only
stray fragments that remained sticking in me....

... Very low and slowly a bird was moving. I saw it was living, like
me. It was turning its head now to the right and then to the left
like a human being, and its round black eyes screwed themselves into
me....

... Then: a human back glistening with fur the color of ancient
ivory;--a mosquito crawling on that back, a mosquito with tiny
transparent wings. The back twitched to chase the mosquito away; it
twitched again....

... And yet another thing: a shadow from the leaves, a woven,
net-like shadow. Some lay in that shadow, chewing something,
something similar to the legendary food of the ancients, a long
yellow fruit and a piece of something dark. They put some of it in
my hand, and it seemed droll to me for I did not know whether I
might eat it or not....

... And again: a crowd, heads, legs, arms, mouths, faces appearing
for a second and disappearing like bursting bubbles. For a second
appeared (or perhaps it was only an hallucination?) the transparent,
flying wing-ears....

With all my might I pressed the hand of I-330. She turned to me.

"What is the matter?"

"He is here! I thought, I--"

"Who?"

"S-, a second ago, in the crowd."

The ends of the thin coal-black, brows moved to the temples--a smile
like a sharp triangle. I could not see clearly why she smiled. How
could she smile?

"But you understand, I-330, don't you, you understand what it means
if he, or one of them is here?"

"You are funny! How could it ever enter the heads of those within
the Wall that we are here? Remember; take yourself. Did you ever
think it was possible? They are busy hunting us _there_,--let them!
You are delirious!"

Her smile was light and cheerful and I too, was smiling; the earth
was drunken, cheerful, light, floating....




RECORD TWENTY-EIGHT

  Both of Them
  Entropy and Energy
  The Opaque Part of the Body


If your world is similar to the world of the ancients, then you may
easily imagine that one day you suddenly come upon a sixth or a
seventh continent, upon some Atlantis, and you find there unheard
of cities, labyrinths, people flying through the air without the
aid of wings or aeros, stones lifted into the air by the power of
a gaze,--in brief, imagine that you see things that cannot come to
your mind even if you suffer from dream-sickness. That is how I feel
now. For you must understand that no one has ever gone beyond the
Green Wall since the Two Hundred Years' War, as I already have told
you.

I know that it is my duty to you, my unknown friends, to give more
details about that unsuspected strange world which opened to me
yesterday. But for the time being I am unable to return to that
subject. Everything is so novel, so novel it is like a rainstorm,
and I am not big enough to collect it all. I spread out the folds of
my unif, my palms,--and yet pailfuls splash past me and only drops
can reach these pages....

At first I heard behind me, behind the door, a loud voice. I
recognized her voice, the voice of I-330, tense, metallic--and
another one, almost inflexible, like a wooden ruler, the voice of
U-. Then the door came open with a crack and both of them shot into
the room. _Shot_ is the right word.

I-330 put her hand on the back of my armchair and smiled over her
shoulder but only with her teeth, at U-. I should not care to stand
before such a smile.

"Listen," she said to me, "this woman seems to have made it her
business to guard you from me like a little child. Is it with your
permission?"

"But he _is_ a child. Yes! That is why he does not notice that you
... that it is only in order.... That all this is only a foul game!
Yes! And it is my duty...."

For a second (in the mirror) the broken, trembling line of brows.
I leaped, controlling with difficulty the other self within me,
the one with the hairy fists; with difficulty, pushing every word
through my teeth, I cried straight into her face, into her very
gills:

"Get out of here at once! Out! At once!"

The gills swelled at first into brick-red lumps, then fell and
became gray. She opened her mouth to say something but without a
word she slammed it shut and went out.

I threw myself towards I-330.

"Never, never will I forgive myself! She dared! You ... but you
don't think, do you, that you, that she.... This is all because she
wants to register on me but I...."

"Fortunately she will not have time for that now. Besides, even a
thousand like her.... I don't care.... I know you will not believe
that thousand but only me. For after all that happened yesterday, I
am all yours, all, to the very end, as you wanted it. I am in your
hands; you can now at any moment...."

"What, 'at any moment?'" (But at once I understood what. My blood
rushed to my ears and cheeks.) "Don't speak about that, you must
never speak about that! The _other_ I, my former self ... but
now...."

"How do I know? Man is like a novel: up to the last page one does
not know what the end will be. It would not be worth reading
otherwise."

She was stroking my head. I could not see her face but I could
tell by her voice that she was looking somewhere very far into
the distance; she hooked herself to that cloud which was floating
silently, slowly, no one knows where to.

Suddenly she pushed me away with her hand, firmly but tenderly.

"Listen. I came to tell you that perhaps we are now ... our last
days.... You know, don't you, that all Auditoriums are to be closed
after tonight?"

"Closed?"

"Yes. I passed by and saw that in all Auditoriums preparations are
going on: tables; medics all in white...."

"But what does it all mean?"

"I don't know. Nobody knows as yet. That is the worst of it. I only
feel the current is on, the spark is jumping, and if not today, then
tomorrow.... Yet perhaps they will not have time...."

For a long while I have ceased to understand who are _they_ and who
_we_. I do not understand what I want; do I want them to have or not
to have enough time? One thing is clear to me: I-330 is now on the
very edge, on the very edge, and in one second more....

"But it is folly," I said. "You, versus the United State! It is the
same as if you should cover the muzzle of a gun with your hands and
expect that way to prevent the shot.... It is absolute folly!"

A smile.

"'We must all go insane,--as soon as possible go insane.' It was
yesterday, do you remember?"

Yes, she was right; I had even written it down. Consequently it
really took place. In silence I looked into her face. At that moment
the dark cross was especially distinct.

"I-, dear, before it is too late.... If you want ... I'll leave
everything, I'll forget everything, and we'll go there beyond the
Wall, to _them_.... I do not even know who they are...."

She shook her head. Through the dark windows of her eyes I saw
within her a flaming oven, sparks, tongues of flame and above them a
heap of dry, tarry wood. It was clear to me that it was too late, my
words could be of no avail.

She stood up. She would soon leave. Perhaps these were the last
days, or the last minutes.... I grasped her hand.

"No, stay a little while longer ... for the sake ... for the
sake...."

She slowly lifted my hand towards the light, my hairy paw which I
detest. I wanted to withdraw it but she held it tightly.

"Your hand.... You undoubtedly don't know and very few do know,
that women from here occasionally used to fall in love with _them_.
Probably there are in you a few drops of that blood of the sun and
the woods. Perhaps that is why I...."

Silence. It was so strange that because of that silence, because of
an emptiness, of nothing, my heart should beat so wildly. I cried.

"Ah, you shall not go yet! You shall not go until you tell me about
_them_ ... for you love ... them, and I do not know even who they
are, nor where they come from."

"Who are they? The half we have lost. H2 and O, two halves; but
in order to get water, H2O, creeks, seas, waterfalls, storms, it
is necessary that those two halves be united."

I distinctly remember every movement of hers. I remember she picked
up a glass triangle from my table and while talking she pressed its
sharp edge against her cheek; a white scar would appear; then it
would fill again and become pink and disappear. And it is strange
that I cannot remember her words, especially the beginning of the
story. I remember only different images and colors. At first,
I remember, she told me about the Two Hundred Years' War. Red
color.... On the green of the grass, on the dark clay, on the
pale blue of the snow,--everywhere red ditches that would not
become dry. Then yellow; yellow grass burned by the sun, yellow
naked wild-men and wild dogs side by side near swollen cadavers
of dogs or perhaps of men. All this, certainly beyond the Walls,
for the City was already the victor and it possessed already our
present-day petroleum food. And at night ... down from the sky
... heavy black folds. The folds would swing over the woods, the
villages,--blackish-red slow columns of smoke. A dull moaning;
endless strings of people driven into the City to be saved by force
and to be whipped into happiness.

"... You knew almost all this."

"Yes, almost."

"But you did not know and only a few did, that a small part of them
remained together and stayed to live beyond the Wall. Being naked,
they went into the woods. They learned there from the trees, beasts,
birds, flowers and sun. Hair soon grew over their bodies, but under
that hair they preserved their warm red blood. With you it was
worse; numbers covered your bodies; numbers crawled over you like
lice. One ought to strip you of everything, and naked you ought to
be driven into the woods. You ought to learn how to tremble with
fear, with joy, with wild anger, with cold; you should pray to fire!
And we Mephi, we want...."

"Oh, wait a minute! 'Mephi,' what does it mean!"

"Mephi? It is from Mephisto. You remember, there on the rock, the
figure of the youth? Or, no. I shall explain it to you in your own
language and you will understand better: there are two forces in
the world, entropy and energy. One leads into blessed quietude, to
happy equilibrium, the other to the destruction of equilibrium,
to torturingly perpetual motion. Our, or rather your ancestors,
the Christians, worshipped entropy like a God. But we are not
Christians, we...."

At that moment a slight whisper was suddenly heard, a knock at the
door, and in rushed that flattened man with the forehead low over
his eyes, who several times had brought me notes from I-330. He ran
straight to us, stopped, panting like an air-pump, and could say not
a word, as he must have been running at top speed.

"But tell me! What has happened?" I-330 grasped him by the hand.

"They are coming here,--" panted the air-pump, "with guards.... And
with them that what's-his-name, the hunchback...."

"S-?"

"Yes. They are in the house by this time. They'll soon be here.
Quick, quick!"

"Nonsense, we have time!" I-330 was laughing, cheerful sparks in her
eyes. It was either absurd, senseless courage, or else there was
something I did not yet understand.

"I-, dear, for the sake of the Well-Doer! You must understand that
this...."

"For the sake of the Well-Doer!" The sharp, triangle-smile.

"Well ... well, for my sake, I implore you!"

"Oh, yes, I wanted to talk to you about some other matters.... Well,
never mind.... We'll talk about them tomorrow."

And cheerfully (yes cheerfully) she nodded to me; the other came out
for a second from under his forehead's awning and nodded also. I was
alone.

Quick! To my desk! I opened this manuscript, took the pen so that
they should find me at this work which is for the benefit of
the United State. Suddenly I felt every hair on my head living,
separated, moving: "What if they should read, even one page of these
most recently written?"

Motionless I sat at the table but everything around me seemed to
be moving, as if the less than microscopic movements of the atoms
suddenly were magnified millions of times, and I saw the walls
trembling, my pen trembling and the letters swinging and fusing
together. "To hide them! But where?" Glass all around. "To burn
them?" But they would notice the fire through the corridor and in
the neighboring room. Besides I felt unable, I felt too weak, to
destroy this torturing and perhaps dearest piece of my own self....

Voices from a distance (from the corridor) and steps. I had only
time to snatch a handful of pages and put them under me, and then as
if soldered to the armchair, every atom of which was quivering, I
remained sitting, while the floor under my feet rolled like the deck
of a ship, up and down....

All shrunk together and hidden under the awning of my own forehead
like that messenger, I watched them stealthily; they were going from
room to room, beginning at the right end of the corridor. Nearer
... nearer.... I saw that some sat in their rooms, torpid like me;
others would jump up and open their doors wide,--lucky ones! If only
I too, could....

"The Well-Doer is the most perfect fumigation humanity needs,
consequently no peristalsis in the organism of the United State
could...." I was writing this nonsense, pressing my trembling pen
hard, and lower and lower my head bent over the table, and within me
some sort of crazy forge.... With my back I was listening ... and
I heard the click of the door-knob.... A current of fresh air....
My armchair was dancing a mad dance.... Only then, and even then
with difficulty, I tore myself away from the page, turned my head
in the direction of the newcomers (how difficult it is to play
a foul game!). In front of all was S-, morose, silent, swiftly
drilling with his eyes deep shafts within me, within my armchair
and within the pages which were twitching in my hands. Then for a
second--familiar, everyday faces at the door; one of them separated
itself from the rest with its bulging, pinkish-brown gills....

At once I recalled everything that happened in the same room half an
hour ago and it was clear to me that they would presently....

All my being was shriveling and pulsating in that fortunately opaque
part of my body with which I was covering the manuscript. U- came up
to S-, gently plucked his sleeve and said in a low voice:

"This is D-503, the builder of the _Integral_. You have probably
heard of him. He is always like that, at his desk; does not spare
himself at all!"

... And I thought!... What a dear, wonderful woman!...

S- slid up to me, bent over my shoulder toward the table. I covered
the lines I had written with my elbow but he shouted severely:

"Show us at once what you have there, please!"

Dying with shame, I held out the sheet of paper. He read it over,
and I noticed a tiny smile jump out of his eyes, jump down his face
and slightly wagging its tail, perch upon the right angle of his
mouth....

"Somewhat ambiguous, yet.... Well, you may continue; we shall not
disturb you any more."

He went splashing towards the door as if in a ditch of water. And
with every step of his I felt coming back to me my legs, my arms,
my fingers,--my soul again distributed itself evenly over my whole
body; I breathed....

The last thing: U- lingered in my room to come back to me and say in
my very ear in a whisper: "It is lucky for you that I...."

I did not understand. What did she mean by that? The same evening I
learned that they led away three Numbers, although nobody speaks out
loud about that, or about anything that happened. This ostensible
silence is due to the educational influence of the Guardians who are
ever present among us. Conversations deal chiefly with the quick
fall of the barometer and the forthcoming change in the weather.




RECORD TWENTY-NINE

  Threads on the Face
  Sprouts
  An Unnatural Compression


It is strange: the barometer continues to fall yet there is no
wind. There is quiet. Above, the storm which we do not yet hear has
begun. The clouds are rushing with a terrific speed. There are few
of them as yet; separate fragments; it is as if there above us an
unknown city were being destroyed and pieces of walls and towers
were rushing down, coming nearer and nearer with terrific speed,
but it will take some days of rushing through the blue infinite
before they reach the bottom, that is us, below. And below there is
silence.

There are thin, incomprehensible, almost invisible threads in the
air; every autumn they are brought here from beyond the Wall. They
float slowly, and suddenly you feel something foreign and invisible
on your face; you want to brush it off, but no, you cannot rid
yourself of it. You feel it especially near the Green Wall, where I
was this morning. I-330 made an appointment with me to meet her in
the Ancient House in that "Apartment" of ours.

I was not far from the rust-red, opaque mass of the Ancient House,
when I heard behind me short hasty steps and rapid breathing. I
turned around and saw O-90 trying to catch up to me. She seemed
strangely and perfectly rounded. Her arms and breast, her whole
body, so familiar to me, was rounded out, stretching her unif. It
seemed as though it would soon tear the thin cloth and come out into
the sun, into the light. I think that there in the green debris, in
springtime, the unseen sprouts try thus to tear their way through
the ground in order to emit their branches and leaves and to bloom.

For a few seconds she shone into my face with her blue eyes in
silence.

"I saw you on the Day of Unanimity."

"I saw you, too." I at once remembered; below, in a narrow passage
she had stood, pressing herself to the wall, protecting her abdomen
with her arms, and automatically I glanced now at her abdomen which
rounded the unif. She must have noticed, for she became pink, and
with a rosy smile:

"I am so happy ... so happy! I am so full of ... you understand, I
am ... I walk and I hear nothing around me.... And all the while I
listen within, within me...."

I was silent. Something foreign was shadowing my face and I was
unable to rid myself of it. Suddenly, all shining, light blue, she
caught my hand; I felt her lips upon it.... It was for the first
time in my life.... It was some ancient caress as yet unknown to
me.... And I was so ashamed and it pained me so much that I swiftly,
I think even roughly, pulled my hand away.

"Listen, you are crazy, it seems.... And anyway you ... what are you
happy about? Is it possible that you forget what is ahead of you? If
not now, then within a month or two...."

Her light went out, her roundness sagged and shrank. And in my
heart an unpleasant, even a painful compression, mixed with pity.
Our heart is nothing else than an ideal pump: a compression, i.e.,
a shrinking at the moment of pumping, is a technical absurdity.
Hence it is clear how essentially absurd, unnatural and pathological
are all these "loves" and "pities," etc., etc., which create that
compression....

Silence. To the left the cloudy green glass of the Wall. And just
ahead the dark red mass. Those two colors combined, gave me as a
resultant what I thought was a splendid idea.

"Wait! I know how to save you! I shall save you from.... To see
one's own child for a few moments only and then be sent to death!
No! You shall be able to bring it up! You shall watch it and see it
grow in your arms, and ripen like a fruit...."

Her body quivered and she seemed to have chained herself to me.

"Do you remember that woman, I-330? That ... of ... of long ago?...
Who during that walk?... Well, she is now right here, in the
Ancient House. Let us go to her and I assure you that I shall
arrange matters at once."

I already pictured us, I-330 and I, leading O-90 through the
corridors ... then how she would be brought amidst flowers, grass,
and leaves.... But O-90 stepped back, the little horns of her rosy
crescent trembling and bending downward.

"Is she _that same one_?" she asked.

"That is...." I was confused for some reason. "Yes, of course ...
that very same...."

"And you want me to go to _her_, to ask her ... to.... Don't you
ever dare to say another word about it!"

Leaning over, she walked away.... Then as if she remembered
something, she turned around and cried:

"I shall die; be it so! And it is none of your business ... what do
you care?"

Silence. From above pieces of blue towers and walls were falling
downward with terrific speed ... they will have perhaps hours or
days to fly through the infinite.... Unseen threads were slowly
floating through the air, planting themselves upon my face, and it
was impossible to brush them off, impossible to rid myself of them.

I walked slowly toward the Ancient House and in my heart I felt that
absurd, tormenting compression....




RECORD THIRTY

  The Last Number
  Galileo's Mistake
  Would It Not Be Better?


Here is my conversation with I-330, which took place in the Ancient
House yesterday in the midst of loud noise, among colors which
stifled the logical course of my thoughts, red, green, bronze,
saffron-yellow, orange colors.... And all the while under the
motionless marble smile of that snub-nosed ancient poet.

I shall reproduce the conversation word by word, for it seems to
me that it may have an enormous and decisive importance for the
fate of the United State,--more than that, for the fate of the
universe. Besides, reading it, you my unknown readers, may find some
justification for me. I-330, without preliminaries, at once threw
everything upon my head:

"I know that the day after tomorrow the first trial trip of the
_Integral_ is to take place. On that day we shall take possession of
it."

"What! Day after tomorrow?"

"Yes. Sit down and don't be upset. We cannot afford to lose a
minute. Among the hundreds who were arrested yesterday there are
twenty Mephis. To let pass two or three days means that they will
perish."

I was silent.

"As observers on the trial trip they will send electricians,
mechanicians, physicians, meteorologists, etc.... At twelve sharp,
you must remember this, when the bell rings for dinner we shall
remain in the passage, lock them all up in the dining hall, and the
_Integral_ will be ours. You realize that it is most necessary,
happen what may! The _Integral_ in our hands will be a tool that
will help to put an end to everything at once without pain.... Their
aeros?... Bah! They would be insignificant mosquitos against a
buzzard. And then, if it proves inevitable, we may direct the tubes
of the motors downward and by their work alone...."

I jumped up.

"It is inconceivable! It is absurd! Is it not clear to you that what
you are contriving is a revolution?"

"Yes, a revolution. Why is it absurd?"

"Absurd? because a revolution is impossible! Because _our_ (I speak
for myself and for you), our revolution was the last one. No other
revolutions may occur. Everybody knows that."

A mocking, sharp triangle of brows.

"My dear, you are a mathematician, are you not? More than that, a
philosopher-mathematician? Well then, name the last number!"

"What is ... I ... I cannot understand, which _last_?"

"The last one, the highest, the largest."

"But I-330, it is absurd! Since the number of numbers is infinite,
how can there be a last one?"

"And why then do you think there is a _last_ revolution? There is
no last revolution, their number is infinite.... The 'last one' is
a children's story. Children are afraid of the infinite, and it is
necessary that children should not be frightened, so that they may
sleep through the night."

"But what is the use, what is the use of it all? For the sake of the
Well-Doer! What is the use since all are happy already?"

"All right! Even suppose that is so. What further?"

"How funny! A purely childish question. You tell something to
children, come to the very end, yet they will invariably ask you,
'what further?' and 'what for?'"

"Children are the only courageous philosophers. And courageous
philosophers are invariably children. One ought always to ask like
children, 'what further'?"

"Nothing further! Period. In the whole world evenly, everywhere,
there is distributed...."

"Ah, 'evenly!' 'Everywhere!' That is the point, entropy!
Psychological entropy. Don't you as a mathematician know that only
differences (only differences!), in temperature, only thermic
contrasts make for life? And if all over the world there are evenly
warm or evenly cold bodies, they must be pushed off! ... in order
to get flame, explosions! And we shall push!..."

"But I-330, please realize that our ancestors during the Two Hundred
Years' War did exactly that!"

"Oh, they were right! A thousand times right! They did one wrong
thing, however; later they began to believe that they were the _last
number_, a number that does not exist in nature. Their mistake was
the mistake of Galileo; he was right in that the earth revolves
about the sun but he did not know that our whole solar system
revolves about some other centre, he did not know that the real (not
relative) orbit of the earth is not a naive circle."

"And you, the Mephi?"

"We? For the time being we know that there is no _last_ number. We
may forget that some day. Of course, we shall certainly forget it
when we grow old, as everything inevitably grows old. Then we shall
inevitably fall like autumn leaves from the trees, like you the
day-after-tomorrow.... No, no dear, not you personally. You are with
us, are you not? You are with us?"

Flaming, stormy, sparkling! I never before had seen her in such a
state. She embraced me with her whole self; I disappeared.

Her last word, looking steadily, deeply into my eyes:

"Then, do not forget: at twelve o'clock sharp."

And I answered:

"Yes, I remember."

She left. I was alone amidst a rebellious, multi-voiced commotion of
blue, red, green, saffron-yellow and orange....

Yes, at twelve!... Suddenly a feeling of something foreign on
my face, of something implanted, that could not be brushed off.
Suddenly, yesterday morning, and U- and all she shouted into the
face of I-330! Why, how absurd!

I hastened to get out of the house and home, home! Somewhere behind
me I heard the chattering of birds beyond the Wall. And ahead of me
in the setting sun the balls of cupolas made of red, crystallized
fire, enormous flaming cubes--houses, and the sharp point of the
Accumulating Tower high in the sky like a paralyzed streak of
lightning. And all this, all this impeccable, most geometric beauty,
shall I, I myself, with my hands...? Is there no way out? No path?
No trail?

I passed by an auditorium (I do not recall its number). Inside, the
benches were stacked along the walls. In the middle, tables covered
with snow-white glass sheets, with pink stains of sunny blood on
the white.... There was foreshadowed in all that some unknown and
therefore alarming tomorrow. It is unnatural for a thinking and
seeing human being to live among irregularities, unknowns, X's. If
suddenly your eyes were covered with a bandage and you were let go
to feel around, to stumble, ever aware that somewhere very close
to you there is the border-line, one step only and nothing but a
compressed, smothered piece of flesh will be left of you.... I now
feel somewhat like that.

... And what if without waiting for anything I should ... just head
down.... Would it not be the only right thing to do? To disentangle
everything at once?




RECORD THIRTY-ONE

  The Great Operation
  I Forgave Everything
  The Collision of Trains


Saved! At the very last moment, when it seemed that there was
nothing to hold to, that it was the end!...

It was as if you already ascended the steps towards the threatening
machine of the Well-Doer, or as if the great glass Bell with a heavy
thud already covered you, and for the last time in life you looked
at the blue sky to swallow it with your eyes ... when suddenly, it
was only a dream! The sun is pink and cheerful and the wall ... what
happiness to be able to touch the cold wall! And the pillow! To
delight endlessly in the little cavity formed by your own head in
the white pillow!... This is approximately what I felt, when I read
the State Journal this morning. It has been all a terrible dream
and this dream is over. And I was so feeble, so unfaithful, that I
thought of selfish, voluntary death! I am ashamed now to reread the
last lines of yesterday. But let them remain as a memory of that
incredible might-have-happened, which will not happen! On the front
page of the State Journal the following gleamed:

"REJOICE!

"For from now on we are _perfect!_

"Before today your own creation, engines, were more perfect than
you.

"WHY?

"For every spark from a dynamo--is a spark of pure reason; each
motion of a piston--a pure syllogism. Is it not true that the same
faultless reason is within you?

"The philosophy of the cranes, presses, and pumps is finished
and clear like a circle. But is your philosophy less circular?
The beauty of a mechanism lies in its immutable, precise rhythm,
like that of a pendulum. But have you not become as precise as a
pendulum, you who are brought up on the system of Taylor?

"Yes, but there is one difference:

"MECHANISMS HAVE NO FANCY

"Did you ever notice a pump cylinder during its work show upon its
face a wide, distant, sensuously-dreaming smile? Did you ever hear
cranes restlessly toss about and sigh at night, during the hours
designed for rest?

"NO!

"Yet on your faces (you may well blush with shame!), the Guardians
have seen more and more frequently those smiles and they have
heard your sighs. And (you should hide your eyes for shame!) the
historians of the United State all tendered their resignations so as
to be relieved from having to record such shameful occurrences.

"It is not your fault; you are ill. And the name of your illness is

"FANCY

"It is a worm that gnaws black wrinkles on one's forehead. It is a
fever that drives one to run farther and farther, albeit 'farther'
may begin where happiness ends. It is the last barricade on our road
to happiness.

"_Rejoice! This Barricade Has Been Blasted at Last! The Road is
Open!_

"The latest discovery of our State science is that there is a centre
for fancy,--a miserable little nervous knot in the lower region of
the frontal lobe of the brain. A triple treatment of this knot with
X-rays will cure you of fancy--

"_Forever!_

"You are perfect; you are mechanized; the road to hundred per-cent
happiness is open! Hasten then all of you, young and old, hasten to
undergo the great Operation! Hasten to the auditoriums where the
great Operation is being performed! Long live the Great Operation!
Long live the United State! Long live the Well-Doer."

You, had you read all this not in my records which look like an
ancient strange novel, had you like me held in your trembling hands
the newspaper, smelling of typographic ink ... if you knew as I do,
that all this is most certain reality, if not the reality of today,
then that of tomorrow,--would you not feel the very things I feel?
Would not your head whirl as mine does? Would there not run over
your back and arms those strange, sweet, icy needles? Would you not
feel that you were a giant, an Atlas?--that if only you stood up and
straightened out you would reach the ceiling with your head?

I snatched the telephone receiver.

"I-330. Yes.... Yes. Yes ... 330!" And then, swallowing my own words
I shouted, "Are you at home? Yes? Have you read? You are reading
now? Is it not, is it not stupendous?"

"Yes...." A long, dark silence. The wires buzzed almost imperceptibly.
She was thinking.

"I must see you today without fail. Yes, in my room, after sixteen,
without fail!"

Dear ... she is such a dear!... "Without fail!" I was smiling and I
could not stop, I felt I should carry that smile with me into the
street like a light above my head.

Outside the wind ran over me, whirling, whistling, whipping, but
I felt even more cheerful. "All right, go on, go on moaning and
groaning! The Walls cannot be torn down." Flying leaden clouds broke
over my head ... well let them! They could not eclipse the sun! We
chained it to the zenith like so many Joshuas, sons of Nuns!

At the corner a group of Joshuas, sons of Nuns, were standing with
their foreheads pasted to the glass of the wall. Inside, on a
dazzling white table already a Number lay. One could see two naked
soles diverging from under the sheet in a yellow angle.... White
medics bent over his head,--a white hand, a stretched-out hand
holding a syringe filled with something....

"And you, what are you waiting for?" I asked nobody in particular,
or rather all of them.

"And you?" Someone's round head turned to me.

"I? Oh, afterward! I must first...." Somewhat confused, I left the
place. I really had to see I-330 first. But why first? I could not
explain to myself....

The docks. The _Integral_, bluish like ice, was glistening and
sparkling. The engine was caressingly grumbling, repeating some one
word, as if it were my word, a familiar one. I bent down and stroked
the long, cold tube of the motor. "Dear! What a dear tube! Tomorrow
it will come to life, tomorrow for the first time it will tremble
with burning, flaming streams in its bowels."

With what eyes would I have looked at the glass monster had
everything remained as it was yesterday? If I knew that tomorrow at
twelve I should betray it, yes, betray.... Someone behind cautiously
touched my elbow. I turned around. The plate-like, flat face of the
Second Builder.

"Do you know already?" he asked.

"What? About the Operation? Yes. How everything, everything ...
suddenly...."

"No, not that. The trial flight is put off until day-after-tomorrow,--on
account of that Operation. They rushed us for nothing; we hurried...."

"On account of that Operation!" Funny, limited man. He could see
no farther than his own platter! If only he knew that but for the
Operation tomorrow at twelve he would be locked-up in a glass cage,
would be tossing about, trying to climb the walls!

At twelve-thirty when I came into my room I saw U-. She was sitting
at my table, firm, straight, bone-like, resting her right cheek on
her hand. She must have waited for a long while because when she
brusquely rose to meet me there remained on her cheek five white
imprints of her fingers.

For a second that terrible morning came back to me; she beside
I-330, indignant. But for a second only. All was at once washed off
by the sun of today, as it happens sometimes when you enter your
room on a bright day and absent-mindedly turn on the light, the bulb
shines but it is out of place, droll, unnecessary.

Without hesitation I held out my hand to her; I forgave her
everything. She firmly grasped both my hands and pressed them
till they hurt. Her cheeks quivering and hanging down like ancient
precious ornaments, she said with emotion:

"I was waiting.... I want only one moment.... I only wanted to say
... how happy, how joyous I am for you! You realize of course, that
tomorrow or day-after-tomorrow you will be healthy again, as if born
anew."

I noticed my papers on the table; the last two pages of my record
of yesterday; they were in the place where I left them the night
before. If only she knew what I wrote there! Although I did not care
after all. Now it was only history; it was the ridiculously far off
distance like an image through a reversed opera-glass.

"Yes," I said, "a while ago, while passing through the avenue, I saw
a man walking ahead of me. His shadow stretched along the pavement
and think of it! his shadow was luminous! I think, more than that,
I am absolutely certain that tomorrow all shadows will disappear.
Not a shadow from any person or any thing! The sun will be shining
through everything."

She, gently and earnestly:

"You are a dreamer! I should not allow my children in school to talk
that way."

She told me something about the children; that they were all led
in one herd to the Operation; that it was necessary to bind them
afterward with ropes; and that one must love pitilessly, "yes,
pitilessly," and that she thought she might finally decide to....

She smoothed out the grayish-blue fold of the unif that fell between
her knees, swiftly pasted her smiles all over me and went out.

Fortunately the sun did not stop today. The sun was running. It was
already sixteen o'clock.... I was knocking at the door, my heart was
knocking....

"Come in!"

I threw myself upon the floor near her chair, to embrace her limbs,
to lift my head upward and look into her eyes, first into one then
into the other, and in each of them to see the reflection of myself
in wonderful captivity....

There beyond the wall it looked stormy, there the clouds were
leaden,--let them be! My head was overcrowded with impetuous
words, and I was speaking aloud, and flying with the sun I knew
not where.... No, now we know where we are flying; planets were
following me, planets sparkling with flame and populated with fiery,
singing flowers and mute planets, blue ones where rational stones
were unified into one organized society, and planets which like
our own earth had reached already the apex of one hundred per-cent
happiness.

Suddenly from above:

"And don't you think that at the apex are, precisely, _stones_
unified into an organized society?" The triangle grew sharper and
sharper, darker and darker.

"Happiness ... well?... Desires are tortures, are they not? It is
clear therefore, that happiness is where there are no longer any
desires, not a single desire any more. What an error, what an absurd
prejudice it was, that formerly we would mark happiness with the
sign 'plus'! No, absolute happiness must be marked 'minus,'--divine
minus!"

I remember I stammered unintelligibly:

"Absolute zero!--minus 273°C."

"Minus 273°--exactly! A somewhat cool temperature. But does it not
prove that we are at the summit?"

As before she seemed somehow to speak for me and through me,
developing to the end my own thoughts. But there was something so
morbid in her tone that I could not refrain ... with an effort I
drew out a "No."

"No," I said, "You, you are mocking...."

She burst out laughing loudly, too loudly. Swiftly, in a second,
she laughed herself to some unseen edge, stumbled and fell over....
Silence.

She stood up, put her hands upon my shoulders and looked into me for
a long while. Then she pulled me toward her and everything seemed to
have disappeared save her sharp, hot lips....

"Good-bye."

The words came from afar, from above, and reached me not at once,
only after a minute, perhaps two minutes later.

"Why ... why 'good-bye'?"

"You have been ill, have you not? Because of me you have committed
crimes. Has not all this tormented you? And now you have the
Operation to look forward to. You will be cured of me. And that
means--good-bye."

"No!" I cried.

A pitilessly sharp black triangle on a white background.

"What? Do you mean that you don't want happiness?"

My head was breaking into pieces; two logical trains collided and
crawled upon each other, rattling and smothering....

"Well, I am waiting. You must choose; the Operation and hundred
per-cent happiness, or...."

"I cannot ... without you.... I must not ... without you...." I
said, or perhaps I only thought, I am not sure which, but I-330
heard.

"Yes, I know," she said. Then, her hands still on my shoulders and
her eyes not letting my eyes go, "Then ... until tomorrow. Tomorrow
at twelve. You remember?"

"No, it was postponed for a day. Day-after-tomorrow!"

"So much the better for us. At twelve, day-after-tomorrow!"

I walked alone in the dusky street. The wind was whirling,
carrying, driving me like a piece of paper; fragments of the leaden
sky were soaring, soaring--they had to soar through the infinite for
another day or two....

Unifs of Numbers were brushing my sides,--yet I was walking alone.
It was clear to me that all were saved but that there was no
salvation for me. For I _do not want_ salvation....




RECORD THIRTY-TWO

  I Do Not Believe
  Tractors
  A Little Human Splinter


Do you believe that _you will die_? Oh, yes, "Man is mortal. I am a
man, consequently...." No, not that; I know that; you know it. But I
ask: has it ever happened that you _actually believed_ it? Believed
definitely, believed not with your reason but with your _body_, that
you actually felt that some day those fingers which now hold this
page, will become yellow, icy?...

No, of course you cannot believe this. That is why you have not
jumped from the tenth floor to the pavement before now, that is why
you eat, turn over these pages, shave, smile, write.

This very thing, yes, exactly this is alive in me today. I know that
that small black hand on the clock will slide down here towards
midnight, then again it will start to ascend, and it will cross
some last border and the improbable tomorrow will have arrived. I
_know_ it, but somehow I do not _believe_ it, or perhaps I think
that twenty-four hours are twenty-four years. Therefore I am still
able to act, to hurry, to answer questions, to climb the rope-ladder
to the _Integral_. I am still able to feel how the latter is shaking
the surface of the water, and I still understand that I must grasp
the railing, and I am still able to feel the cold glass in my hand.
I see the transparent, living cranes, bending their long necks,
carefully feeding the _Integral_ with the terrible explosive food
which the motors need. I still see below on the river the blue veins
and knots of water swollen by the wind.... Yet all this seems very
distant from me, foreign, flat,--like a draught on a sheet of paper.
And it seems to me strange, when the flat, draught-like face of the
Second Builder, suddenly asks:

"Well, then. How much fuel for the motors shall we load on? If we
count on three, or say three and a half hours...."

I see before me, over a draught, my hand with the counter and the
logarithmic dial at the figure 15.

"Fifteen tons. But you'd better take ... yes, better take a
thousand."

I said that because I _know_ that tomorrow.... I noticed that my
hands and the dial began to tremble.

"A thousand! What do you need such a lot for? That would last a
week! No, more than a week!"

"Well, nobody knows...."

I do know....

The wind whistled, the air seemed to be stuffed to the limit with
something invisible. I had difficulty in breathing, difficulty in
walking, and with difficulty, slowly but without stopping for a
second the hand of the Accumulating Tower was crawling, at the
end of the avenue. The peak of the Tower reached into the very
clouds;--dull, blue, groaning in a subdued way, sucking electricity
from the clouds. The tubes of the Musical Tower resounded.

As always--four abreast. But the rows did not seem as firm as usual;
they were swinging, bending more and more, perhaps because of the
wind. There! They seemed to have stumbled upon something at the
corner, and they drew back and stopped, congealed, a close mass, a
clot, breathing rapidly; at once all had stretched their necks like
geese.

"Look! No look, look--there, quick!"

"_They?_ Are those _they_?"

"Ah, never! Never! I'd rather put my head straight into the
Machine...."

"Silence! Are you crazy?"

On the corner the doors of the auditorium were ajar, a heavy column
of about fifty people--. The word "people" is not the right one.
These were heavy-wheeled automatons bound in iron and moved by an
invisible mechanism. Not people but a sort of human-like tractor.
Over their heads, floating in the air--a white banner with a golden
sun embroidered on it, and the rays of the sun: "We are the first!
We have already been operated upon! Follow us, all of you!"

They slowly, unhesitatingly mowed through the crowd, and it was
clear that if they had had in their way a wall, a tree, a house,
they would have moved on with no more hesitation through wall, tree
or house. In the middle of the avenue they fused and stretched out
into a chain, arm in arm, their faces turned towards us. And we,
a human clot, tense, the hair pricking our heads, we waited. Our
necks were stretched out goose-fashion. Clouds. The wind whistled.
Suddenly the wings of the chain from right and left bent quickly
around us, and faster, faster, like a heavy engine descending a
hill, they closed the ring and pulled us toward the yawning doors
and inside....

Somebody's piercing cry: "They are driving us in! Run!"

All ran. Close to the wall there still was an open living gate of
human beings. Everybody dashed through it, heads forward. Their
heads became sharp wedges, so with their ribs, shoulders, hips....
Like a stream of water compressed in a firehose they spurted out
in the form of a fan,--and all around me stamping feet, raised
arms, unifs.... The double-curved S- with his transparent wing-ears
appeared for a moment close before my eyes; he disappeared as
suddenly; I was alone among arms and legs appearing for a second and
disappearing. I was running....

I dashed to the entrance of a house to stop for a breath, my back
close to the door,--and immediately, like a splinter borne by the
wind, a human being was thrown towards me.

"All the while I ... I have been following you. I do not want ... do
you see? I do not want ... I am ready to...."

Small round hands on my sleeves, round dark blue eyes--it was O-90.
She just slipped along my body like a unif which, its hanger broken,
slips along the wall to fall upon the floor. Like a little bundle
she crumpled below me on the cold door-step, and I stood over her,
stroking her head, her face,--my hands were wet. I felt as if I
were very big and she very small, a small part of myself. I felt
something quite different from what I feel towards I-330. I think
that the ancients must have had similar feelings towards their
private children.

Below, passing through her hands with which she was covering her
face, a voice came to me:

"Every night I ... I cannot! If they cure me.... Every night I sit
in the darkness alone and think of _him_, and of what he will look
like when I.... If cured I should have nothing to live with--do you
understand me? You must ... you must...."

An absurd feeling yet it was there; I really must! Absurd, because
this "duty" of mine was nothing but another crime. Absurd, because
white and black cannot be one, duty and crime cannot coincide. Or
perhaps there is no black and white in life, but everything depends
upon the first logical premise? If the premise is that I unlawfully
gave her a child....

"It is all right, but don't, only don't ..." I said. "Of course I
understand.... I must take you to I-330, as I once offered to, so
that she...."

"Yes." (This in a low voice, without uncovering her face.)

I helped her rise. Silently we went along the darkening street, each
busy with his own thoughts, or perhaps with the same thought.... We
walked between silent leaden houses, through the tense, whipping
branches of the wind....

Through the whistling of the wind all at once I heard, as if
splashing through ditches, the familiar footsteps coming from some
unseen point. At the corner I turned around, and among the clouds,
flying upside-down reflected in the dim glass of the pavement I saw
S-. Instantly my arms became foreign, swinging out of time, and
I began to tell O-90 in a low voice that tomorrow, yes tomorrow,
was the day of the first flight of the _Integral_, and that it was
to be something that never happened before in all history, great,
miraculous.

"Think of it! For the first time in life to find myself outside
the limits of our city and see--who knows what is beyond the Green
Wall?"

O-90 looked at me extremely surprised, her blue eyes trying to
penetrate mine; she looked at my senselessly swinging arms. But
I did not let her say a word,--I kept talking, talking.... And
within me, apart from what I was saying and audible only to myself a
thought was feverishly buzzing and knocking. "Impossible! You must
somehow ... you must not lead _him_ to I-330!"

Instead of turning to the right I turned to the left. The bridge
submissively bent its back in a slavish way to all three of us,
to me, to O-, to him behind. Lights were falling from the houses
across the water, falling and breaking into thousands of sparks
which danced feverishly, sprayed with the mad white foam of the
water. The wind was moaning like a tensely stretched string of a
double-basso somewhere not far away. Through this basso, behind, all
the while....

The house where I live. At the entrance O- stopped and began:

"No! You promised, did you not, that...."

I did not let her finish. Hastily I pushed her through the entrance
and we found ourselves in the lobby. At the controller's desk--the
familiar, hanging, excitedly quivering cheeks, a group of Numbers
around. They were quarreling about something, heads bending over the
banisters on the second floor; they were running downstairs one by
one. But about that later. I at once drew O-90 into the opposite,
unoccupied corner and sat down with my back to the wall. I saw a
dark large-headed shadow gliding back and forth over the sidewalk. I
took out my notebook. O-90 in her chair was slowly sinking as if she
were evaporating from under her unif, as if her body were thawing,
as if only her empty unif were left, and empty eyes taking one into
the blue emptiness. In a tired voice:

"Why did you bring me here? You lied to me?"

"No, not so loud! Look here! Do you see? Through the wall?"

"Yes, I see a shadow."

"He is always following me.... I cannot.... Do you understand? I
cannot therefore ... I am going to write a few words to I-330. You
take the note and go alone. I know he will remain here."

Her body began again to take form and to move beneath the unif; on
her face a faint sunrise, dawn. I put the note between her cold
fingers, pressed her hand firmly and for the last time looked into
her blue eyes.

"Good-bye. Perhaps some day...." She freed her hand. Slightly
bending over she slowly moved away, made two steps, turned around
quickly and again we were side by side. Her lips were moving; with
her lips and with her eyes she repeated some inaudible word. What an
unbearable smile! What suffering!

Then the bent-over human splinter went to the door; a bent-over
little shadow beyond the wall; without turning around she went on
faster, still faster....

I went to U-'s desk. With emotion filling up her indignant gills she
said to me:

"They have all gone crazy! He, for instance, is trying to assure me
that he himself saw a naked man covered with hair near the Ancient
House...."

A voice from the group of empty raised heads;

"Yes. I repeat it, yes."

"Well, what do you think of that? Oh, what a delirium!" The
word "delirium" came out of her mouth so full of conviction, so
unbending, that I asked myself: "Perhaps it really was nothing but
delirium, all that has been going on around me of late?" I glanced
at my hairy hand and I remembered: "There are, undoubtedly, some
drops of that blood of the sun and woods in you. That is why perhaps
you...." No, fortunately it was not delirium; or no, _un_fortunately
it was not delirium.




RECORD THIRTY-THREE

This without a Synopsis, Hastily, the Last


_The day._

Quick, to the newspaper! perhaps there.... I read the paper with
my eyes (exactly; my eyes now are like a pen, or like a counting
machine which you hold and feel in your hands like a tool, something
foreign, an instrument). In the newspaper on the first page, in
large print:

"THE ENEMIES OF HAPPINESS ARE AWAKE! HOLD TO YOUR HAPPINESS WITH
BOTH HANDS. TOMORROW ALL WORK WILL STOP AND ALL THE NUMBERS ARE TO
COME TO BE OPERATED UPON. THOSE WHO FAIL TO COME WILL BE SUBMITTED
TO THE MACHINE OF THE WELL-DOER."

Tomorrow! How can there be, how can there be any tomorrow?

Following my daily habit, I stretched out my arm (instrument!)
to the bookshelf to put today's paper with the rest in a cover
ornamented with gold. While doing this: "What for? What does it
matter? Never again shall I.... In this cover, never...." And out of
my hands, down to the floor it fell.

I stood looking all around, over all my room; hastily I was taking
away, feverishly putting into some unseen valise everything I
regretted leaving here: my desk, my books, my chair. Upon that chair
sat I-330 that day; I was below on the floor.... My bed.... Then
for a minute or two I stood and waited for some miracle to happen;
perhaps the telephone would ring, perhaps she would say that.... But
no, no miracle....

I am leaving, going into the unknown. These are my last lines.
Farewell you, my unknown beloved ones, with whom I have lived
through so many pages, before whom I have bared my diseased soul,
my whole self to the last broken little screw, to the last cracked
spring.... I am going....




RECORD THIRTY-FOUR

  The Forgiven Ones
  A Sunny Night
  A Radio-Walkyrie


Oh, if only I actually had broken myself to pieces! If only I
actually had found myself with her in some place beyond the Wall,
among beasts showing their yellow tusks; if only I actually had
never returned here! It would be a thousand, a million times easier!
But now--what? Now to go and choke that--! But would it help? No,
no, no! Take yourself in hand, D-503! Set into yourself the firm
logical hub; at least for a short while weigh heavily with all your
might on the lever, and like the ancient slave, turn the millstones
of syllogisms until you have written down and understood everything
that happened....

When I boarded the _Integral_, everybody was already there and
everybody occupied his place; all the cells of the gigantic hive
were filled. Through the glass of the decks,--tiny, ant-like
people below, at the telegraph, dynamo, transformers, altimeters,
ventilators, indicators, motor, pumps, tubes.... In the saloon
people sitting over tables and instruments, probably those
commissioned by the Scientific Bureau. Near them the Second Builder
and his two aides. All three had their heads down between their
shoulders like turtles, their faces gray, autumnal, rayless.

"Well?" I asked.

"Well, somewhat uncanny," replied one of them smiling a gray rayless
smile, "Perhaps we shall have to land in some unknown place. And,
generally speaking, nobody knows...."

I hardly could bear to look at them, when in an hour or so I was to
throw them out with my own hands, to cast them out from the cozy
figures of our Tables of Hours, forever to tear them away from
the mother's breast of the United State. They reminded me of the
tragic figures of "The Three Forgiven Ones"--a story known to all
of our school-children. It tells about three Numbers, who by way of
experiment were exempted for a whole month from any work.[3] "Go
wherever you will, do what you will," they were told. The unhappy
three wandered the whole time about the place of their usual work
and gazed within with hungry eyes. They would stop on the plazas
and for hours busy themselves repeating the motions which they were
used to making during certain hours of the day; it became a bodily
necessity for them to do so. They would saw and plane the air; with
unseen sledge-hammers they would bang upon unseen stakes. Finally,
on the tenth day they could bear it no longer; they took one another
by the hand, entered the river, and to the accompaniment of the
March they waded deeper and deeper until the water forever ended
their sufferings.

[3] It happened long ago, in the third century A. T. (After the
Tables).

I repeat, it was hard for me to look at them, and I was anxious to
leave them.

"I just want to take a glance into the engine-room, and then off!" I
said.

They were asking me questions: What voltage should be used for the
initial spark, how much ballast water was needed in the tank aft.
As if a phonograph were somewhere within me, I was giving quick
and precise answers but _I_, my inner self, was busy with its own
thoughts.

In the narrow passage gray unifs were passing, gray faces and for a
second, one face with its hair low over the forehead, eyes gazing
from deep beneath it--it was _that same man_. I understood: _they_
had come and there was no escape from it for me; only minutes
remained, a few dozens of minutes.... An infinitesimal, molecular
quiver of my whole body. This did not cease to the very end,--it was
as if an enormous motor were placed under the very foundation of my
body which was so light that the walls, partitions, cables, beams,
lights--everything was quivering....

I did not yet know whether _she_ was there. But I had no time....
They were calling me: quick! To the commander's bridge; time to go
... where?

Gray, rayless faces. Below in the water--tense blue veins. Heavy,
cast-iron patches of sky. It was so difficult to lift my cast-iron
hand and take up the receiver of the commander's telephone!... "Up!
Forty-five degrees!"

A heavy explosion--a jerk--a rabid greenish-white mountain of water
aft--the deck beneath my feet began to move, soft as rubber; and
everything below, the whole life, forever.... For a second, falling
deeper and deeper into a sort of funnel, becoming more and more
compressed--the icy-blue relief-map of the City, the round bubbles
of cupolas, the lonely leaden finger of the Accumulating Tower....
Then instantaneously a cotton curtain of cloud.... We pierced it,
and there was the sun and the blue sky! Seconds, minutes, miles--the
blue was hardening, fast filling with darkness; like drops of cold
silver sweat appeared the stars....

A sad, unbearably bright, black, starry, sunny night.... As if one
had become deaf, one still saw that the pipes were roaring, but
one only saw, dead silence all about. The sun was mute. It was
natural, of course. One might have expected it; we were beyond the
terrestrial atmosphere. The transition was so quick, so sudden
that everyone became timid and silent. Yet I ... I thought I felt
even easier under that fantastic, mute sun. I had bounded over the
inevitable border, having left my body somewhere there below, and
I was soaring bodiless to a new world, where everything was to be
different, upside down.

"Keep the same course!" I shouted into the engine-room, or perhaps
it was not I but a phonograph in me, and the same machine with a
mechanical, hinge-like movement handed the commander's trumpet to
the Second Builder. All permeated by that most delicate, molecular
quiver known only to me, I ran down the companionway, to seek....

The door of the saloon.... An hour later it was to latch and lock
itself.... At the door stood an unfamiliar Number. He was small,
with a face like a hundred or a thousand others which are usually
lost in a crowd, but his arms were exceptionally long,--they reached
down to the knees as though by mistake they had been taken from
another set of human organs and fastened to his shoulders.

The long arm stretched out and barred the way.

"Where do you want to go?"

It was clear that he was not aware I knew everything. All right!
Perhaps it was necessary that it should be so. From above him, in a
deliberately significant tone I said:

"I am the Builder of the _Integral_ and I am directing the test
flight. Do you understand?"

The arm drew away.

The saloon. Heads covered with bristles, gray iron bristles, and
yellow heads, and bald, ripe heads were bent over the instruments
and maps. Swiftly, with a glance, I gathered them in with my
eyes, off I ran, back along the long passage, then through the
hatch into the engine-room. There it was hot from the red tubes,
overheated by the explosions; a constant roar,--the levers were
dancing their desperate drunken dance, quivering ceaselessly with
a barely noticeable quiver; the arrows on the dials.... There! At
last! Near the tachometer, a notebook in his hand, was that man with
the low forehead.

"Listen," I shouted straight into his ear (because of the roar), "Is
she here? Where is she?"

"She? There at the radio."

I dashed over there. There were three of them, all with receiving
helmets on. And she seemed a head taller than usual, wingy,
sparkling, flying like an ancient walkyrie, and those bluish sparks
from the radio seemed to emanate from her,--from her also that
ethereal, lightning-like odor of ozone.

"Someone--well, you for instance," I said to her, panting from
having run, "I must send a message down to earth, to the docks.
Come, I shall dictate it to you."

Close to the apparatus there was a small box-like cabin. We sat at
the table side by side. I found her hand and pressed it hard.

"Well, what is going to happen?"

"I don't know. Do you realize how wonderful it is? To fly without
knowing where ... no matter where? It will soon be twelve o'clock
and nobody knows what.... And when night.... Where shall you and I
be tonight? Perhaps somewhere on the grass, on dry leaves...."

Blue sparks emanated from her and the odor of lightning, and the
vibration became more and more frequent within me.

"Write down," I said loudly, panting (from having run), "Time:
eleven-twenty; speed 5800...."

"Last night she came to me with your note. I know ... I know
everything; don't talk.... But the child is yours. I sent her over;
she is already beyond the Wall. She will live...."

I was back on the commander's bridge, back in the delirious night
with its black, starry sky and its dazzling sun. The hands of
the clock on the table were slowly moving from minute to minute.
Everything was permeated by a thin, hardly perceptible quivering
(only I noticed it). For some reason a thought passed through
my head: it would be better if all this took place not here but
somewhere below, nearer to earth.

"Stop!" I commanded.

We kept moving by inertia, but more and more slowly. Now the
_Integral_ was caught for a second by an imperceptible little
hair--for a second it hung motionless, then the little hair broke
and the _Integral_ like a stone dashed downward with increasing
speed. That way in silence, minutes, tens of minutes passed. My
pulse was audible; the hand of the clock before my eyes came closer
and closer to twelve. It was clear to me I was a stone; I-330 the
earth; and the stone was under irresistible compulsion to fall
downward, to strike the earth and break into small particles. What
if...? Already the hard blue smoke of the clouds appeared below....
What if...? But the phonograph within me with a hinge-like motion
and precision took the telephone and commanded: "Low speed!" The
stone ceased falling. Only the four lower tubes were growling, two
ahead and two aft, only enough to hold the _Integral_ motionless,
and the _Integral_, only slightly trembling, stopped in the air as
if anchored, about one kilometer from the earth.

Everybody came out on deck, (it was shortly before twelve, before
the sounding of the dinner-gong) and leaned over the glass railing;
hastily, in huge gulps, they swallowed the unknown world which lay
below, beyond the Green Wall. Amber, blue, green, the autumnal
woods, prairies, a lake. At the edge of a little blue saucer, some
lone yellow debris, a threatening, dried-out yellow finger,--it must
have been the tower of an ancient "church" saved by a miracle....

"Look, there! Look! There to the right!"

There (over the green desert) a brown blot was rapidly moving. I
held a telescope in my hands and automatically I brought it to my
eyes: the grass reaching their chests, a herd of brown horses was
galloping, and on their back--_they_, black, white, and dark....

Behind me:

"I assure you, I saw a face!"

"Go away! Tell it to someone else!"

"Well, look for yourself! Here is the telescope."

They had already disappeared. Endless green desert, and in
that desert, dominating it completely and dominating me, and
everybody--the piercing vibrations of the gong; dinner time, one
minute to twelve.

For a second the little world around me became incoherent,
dispersed. Someone's brass badge fell to the floor. It mattered
little. Soon it was under my heel. A voice: "And I tell you, it was
a face!" A black square, the open door of the main saloon. White
teeth pressed together, smiling.... And at that moment, when the
clock began slowly, holding its breath between beats, to strike,
and when the front rows began to move towards the dining saloon,
the rectangle of the door was suddenly crossed by the two familiar,
unnaturally long arms:

"STOP!"

Someone's fingers sank piercing into my palm. It was I-330. She was
beside me.

"Who is it, do you know him?"

"Is he not ... is he not?..."

He was already lifted upon somebody's shoulders. Above a hundred
other faces, his face like hundreds, like thousands of other faces
yet unique among the rest....

"In the name of the Guardians! You, to whom I talk, _they_ hear me,
every one of them hears me,--I talk to you: _we know_! We don't know
your numbers yet but we know everything else. The _Integral_ shall
not be yours! The test flight will be carried out to the end and you
yourselves, you will not dare to make another move! You with your
own hands will help to go on with the test and afterward ... well, I
have finished!"

Silence. The glass plates under my feet seemed soft, cotton-like.
My feet too,--soft, cotton-like. Beside me--she with a dead-white
smile, angry blue sparks. Through her teeth to me:

"Ah! It is your work! You did your 'duty'! Well...." She tore her
hand from mine; the walkyrie helmet with indignant wings was soon to
be seen some distance in front of me. I was alone, torpid, silent.
Like everyone else I followed into the dining saloon.

But it was not I, not I! I told nobody, save these white, mute
pages.... I cried this to her within me, inaudibly, desperately,
loudly. She was across the table, directly opposite me and not once
did she even touch me with her gaze. Beside her, someone's ripe,
yellow, bald head. I heard (it was I-330's voice):

"'Nobility' of character! But my dear professor, even a superficial
etymological analysis of the word shows that it is a superstition, a
remnant of the ancient feudal epoch. We...."

I felt I was growing pale,--and that they would soon notice it.
But the phonograph within me performed the prescribed fifty chewing
movements for every bite. I locked myself into myself as though
into an opaque house; I threw up a heap of rocks before my door and
lowered the window-blinds....

Afterward, again the telephone of the commander was in my hands
and again we made the flight with icy, supreme anxiety through the
clouds into the icy, starry, sunny night. Minutes, hours passed....
Apparently all that time the logical motor within me was working
feverishly at full speed. For suddenly somewhere at a distant point
of the dark blue space I saw my desk, and the gill-like cheeks of U-
over it and the forgotten pages of my records! It became clear to
me; nobody but she ... everything was clear to me!

If only I could reach the radio-room soon ... wing-like helmets,
the odor of blue lightnings ... I remember telling her something in
a low voice and I remember how she looked _through_ me and how her
voice seemed to come from a distance:

"I am busy. I am receiving a message from below. You may dictate
yours to her."

The small, box-like little cabin.... I thought for a second and then
dictated in a firm voice:

"Time 14:40. Going down. Motors stopped. The end of all."

The commander's bridge. The machine-heart of the _Integral_ stopped;
we were falling; my heart could not catch up and would remain
behind and rise higher and higher into my throat.... Clouds.... And
then a distant green spot--everything green, more and more distinct,
running like a storm towards us. "Soon the end."

The porcelain-like white distorted face of the Second Builder!
It was he who struck me with all his strength; I hurt my head on
something; and through the approaching darkness while falling I
heard:

"Full speed--aft!"

A brusque jolt upward....




RECORD THIRTY-FIVE

  In a Ring
  A Carrot
  A Murder


I did not sleep all night. The whole night but one thought.... As
a result of yesterday's mishap my head is tightly bandaged,--it
seems to me not a bandage but a ring, a pitiless ring of glass-iron,
riveted about my head. And I am busy with the same thought, always
the same thought in my riveted circle: to kill U-. To kill U-
and then go to her and say: "Now do you believe?" What is most
disquieting is that to kill is dirty, primitive. To break her head
with something--the thought of it gives me a peculiar sensation of
something disgustingly sweet in my mouth, and I am unable to swallow
my saliva; I am always spitting into my handkerchief, yet my mouth
feels dry.

I had in my closet a heavy piston-rod which cracked during the
casting and which I brought home in order to find out the cause of
the cracking with a microscope. I made my manuscript into a tube
(let her read me to the last letter!), pushed the broken piston into
that tube and went downstairs. The stairway seemed endless, the
steps disgustingly slippery, liquid. I had to wipe off moisture
from my mouth very frequently. Downstairs ... my heart dropped. I
took out the piston and went to the controller's table, but she was
not there; instead an empty, icy desk with ink-blots. I remembered
that today all work was stopped; everybody was to go to be operated
upon. Hence there was no need for her to stay here. There was nobody
to be registered....

The street. It was windy. The sky seemed to be composed of soaring
panels of cast-iron. And exactly as it seemed for one moment
yesterday, the whole world was broken up into separate, sharp,
independent fragments, and each of these fragments was falling at
full speed; each would stop for a second, hang before me in the
air and disappear without trace. It was as if the black, precise
letters on this page should suddenly move apart and begin to jump
hither and thither in fright, so that there was not a word on the
page, only nonsensical "ap," "jum," "wor." The crowd seemed just
as nonsensical, dispersed (not in rows), going forward, backward,
diagonally, transversely....

Then nobody. For a second while I was dashing at full speed,
suddenly stopping, I saw on the second floor in the glass cage
hanging in the air,--a man and a woman--a kiss; she standing with
her whole body bent backward brokenly: "This is for the last time,
forever...."

At a corner a thorny, moving bush of heads. Above the heads,
separate, floating in the air, a banner: "Down with the machines!
Down with the Operation!" And (distinct from my own self) I thought:
"Is it possible that each one of us bears such a pain, that it can
be removed only with his heart.... That something must be done to
each one, before he...." For a second everything disappeared for me
from the world, except my beast-like hand with the heavy cast-iron
package it held....

A boy appeared. He was running, a shadow under his lower lip. The
lower lip turned out like the cuff of a rolled-up sleeve. His face
was distorted; he wept loudly; he was running away from somebody.
Stamping of feet was heard behind him....

The boy reminded me: "U- must be in school. I must hurry!" I ran
to the nearest opening of the Underground Railway. At the entrance
someone passed me and said, "Not running. No trains today ...
there!" I descended. A sort of general delirium was reigning. The
glitter of cut-crystal suns; the platform packed closely with heads.
An empty, torpid train.

In the silence--a voice. I could not see her but I knew, I knew that
intense, living, flexible, whip-like, flogging voice! I felt there
that sharp triangle of brows drawn to the temples....

"Let me! Let me reach her! I must!..."

Someone's tentacles caught my arm, my shoulders. I was nailed. In
the silence I heard:

"No. Go up to them. There they will cure you; there they will
overfeed you with that leavened happiness. Satiated, you will
slumber peacefully, organized, keeping time and snoring sweetly. Is
it possible that you do not yet hear that great symphony of snoring?
Foolish people! Don't you realize that they want to liberate you
from these gnawing, worm-like, torturing question marks? And you
remain standing here and listening to me? Quick! Up! To the Great
Operation! What is your concern, if I remain here alone? What does
it matter to you if I want to struggle, hopelessly struggle? So much
the better! What does it matter to you that I do not want others
to desire for me? I want to desire for myself. If I desire the
impossible...."

Another voice, slow, heavy:

"Ah, the impossible! Which means to run after your stupid fancies;
those fancies would whirl from under your very noses like a tail.
No, we shall catch that tail, and then...."

"And then--swallow it and fall snoring; a new tail will become
necessary. They say the ancients had a certain animal which they
called 'Ass.' In order to make it go forward they would attach a
carrot to a bow held in front of its nose, so that it could not
reach it.... If it had caught and swallowed it...."

The tentacles suddenly let me go; I threw myself towards the place
she was speaking from; but at that very moment everything was
brought to confusion. Shouts from behind: "They are coming here!
Coming here!" The lights twinkled and went out,--someone cut the
cable,--and everything was like a lava of cries, groaning, heads,
fingers....

I do not know how long we were rolled about that way in the
underground tube. I only remember that steps were felt, dusk
appeared, becoming brighter and brighter, and again we were in the
street, dispersing fan-wise in different directions.

Again I was alone. Wind. Gray, low twilight crawling over my head.
In the damp glass of the sidewalk, somewhere very deep, there were
light topsy-turvy walls and figures moving along, feet upward. And
that terribly heavy package in my hands pulled me down into that
depth to the bottom.

At the desk again. U- was not yet there; her room was dark and
empty. I went up to my room and turned on the light. My temples
tightly bound by the iron ring were pulsating. I paced and paced,
always in the same circle: my table, the white package on the table,
the bed, my table, the white package on the table.... In the room
to my left the curtains were lowered. To my right: the knotty bald
head over a book, the enormous parabolic forehead. Wrinkles on the
forehead like a series of yellow, illegible lines. At times our eyes
met and then I felt that those lines were about me.

... It happened at twenty-one o'clock exactly. U- came in on her
own initiative. I remember that my breathing was so loud that I
could hear it and that I wanted to breathe less noisily but was
unable to.

She sat down and arranged the fold of her unif on her knees. The
pinkish-brown gills were waving.

"Oh, dear, is it true that you are wounded? I just learned about it,
and at once I ran...."

The piston was before me on the table. I jumped up, breathing even
louder. She heard, and stopped half-way through a word and rose.
Already I had located the place on her head; something disgustingly
sweet was in my mouth.... My handkerchief! I could not find it. I
spat on the floor.

The fellow with the yellow fixed wrinkles which think of me! It was
necessary that he should not see. It would be even more disgusting
if he could.... I pressed the button. (I had no right to do that,
but who cared about rights then?) The curtains fell.

Evidently she felt and understood what was coming for she rushed to
the door. But I was quicker than she and I locked the door with the
key, breathing loudly and not taking my eyes for a second away from
that place on her head....

"You ... you are mad! How dare you...." She moved backward towards
the bed, put her trembling hands between her knees.... Like a tense
spring, holding her firmly with my gaze, I slowly stretched out my
arm towards the table (only one arm could move), and I snatched the
piston.

"I implore you! One day--only one day! Tomorrow I shall go and
attend to the formalities...."

What was she talking about? I swung my arm.... And I consider I
killed her. Yes, you my unknown readers, you have the right to call
me murderer. I know that I should have dealt the blow on her head
had she not screamed:

"For ... for the sake ... I agree.... I ... one moment...." With
trembling hands she tore off her unif;--a large, yellow, drooping
body, she fell upon the bed....

Then I understood; she thought that I pulled the curtains ... in
order to ... that I wanted....

This was so unexpected and so stupid that I burst out laughing.
Immediately the tense spring within me broke and my hand weakened
and the piston fell to the floor.

Here I learned from personal experience that laughter is the most
terrible of weapons; you can kill anything with laughter, even
murder. I sat at my table and laughed desperately; I saw no way out
of that absurd situation. I don't know what would have been the end
if things had run their natural course, for suddenly a new factor in
the arithmetical chain: the telephone rang.

I hurried, grasped the receiver. Perhaps she ... I heard an
unfamiliar voice:

"Wait a minute."

Annoying, infinite buzzing. Heavy steps from afar, nearer and louder
like cast-iron, and....

"D-503? The Well-Doer speaking. Come at once to me."

Ding! He hung up the receiver. Ding! like a key in a keyhole.

U- was still in bed, eyes closed, gills apart in the form of a
smile. I picked up her clothes, threw them on her and said through
clenched teeth:

"Well. Quick! Quick!"

She raised her body on her elbow, her breasts hanging down to one
side, eyes round. She became a figure of wax.

"What?"

"Get dressed, that is what!"

Face distorted, she firmly snatched her clothes and said in a flat
voice, "Turn away...."

I turned away, pressed my forehead against the glass. Light,
figures, sparks, were trembling in the black, wet mirror.... No,
all this was I, myself,--within me.... What did he call me for?
Is it possible that he knows already about her, about me, about
everything?

U-, already dressed, was at the door. I made a step toward her and
pressed her hand as hard as though I hoped to squeeze out of it drop
by drop what I needed.

"Listen.... Her name, you know whom I am talking of,--did you report
her name? No? Tell the truth, I must.... I care not what happens,
but tell the truth!"

"No."

"No? But why not, since you...."

Her lower lip turned out like the lip of that boy and her face ...
tears were running down her cheeks.

"Because I ... I was afraid that if I did you might ... you would
stop lov-- Oh, I cannot, I could not!"

I understood. It was the truth. Absurd, ridiculous, human truth. I
opened the door.




RECORD THIRTY-SIX

  Empty Pages
  The Christian God
  About My Mother


It is very strange that a kind of empty white page should be left
in my head. How I walked there, how I waited (I remember I had to
wait), I know nothing about it; I remember not a sound, not a face,
not a gesture, as if all communicating wires between me and the
world were cut.

When I came to, I found myself standing before Him; I feared to
raise my eyes,--I saw only His enormous cast-iron hands upon His
knees. Those hands weighed upon Him, bending His knees with their
weight. He was slowly moving His fingers. His face was somewhere
above as if in fog. And, only because His voice came to my ear from
such a height, it did not roar like thunder, it did not deafen me
but appeared to be an ordinary human voice.

"Then you too, you the Builder of the _Integral_! You, whose lot
it was to become the greatest of all _conquistadores_! You whose
name was to have been at the head of a glorious, new chapter of the
history of the United State! You...."

Blood ran to my head, to my cheeks,--and here again a white page;
only the pulsation in my temples and the heavy voice from above;
but I remember not a word. Only when He became silent I came to
and noticed how His hand moved heavily like a thousand pounds, and
crawled slowly,--a finger threatened me.

"Well! Why are you silent? Is it true, or not? Executioner? So!"

"So," I repeated submissively. And then I clearly heard every word
of His.

"Well then? Do you think I am afraid of the word! Did you ever try
to take off its shell and look into its inner meaning? I shall tell
you.... Remember a blue hill, a crowd, a cross? Some up on the hill,
sprinkled with blood, are busy nailing a body to the cross; others
below, sprinkled with tears, are gazing upward. Does it not seem to
you that the part which those above must play is the more difficult,
the most important part? If it were not for them, how could that
magnificent tragedy ever have been staged? True, they were hissed
by the dark crowd but for that the author of the tragedy, God,
should have remunerated them the more liberally, should he not?
And the Christian, most clement God himself, who burnt on a slow
fire all the infidels, is he not an executioner? Was the number
of those burned by the Christians less than the number of burned
Christians? Yet (you must understand this!), yet this God was for
centuries glorified as the God of love! Absurd? Oh, no. Just the
contrary. It is rather a patent for the imperishable wisdom of man,
written in blood. Even at the time when he still was wild and hairy
man knew that real, algebraic love for humanity must inevitably be
inhuman, and that the inevitable mark of truth is cruelty, just as
the inevitable mark of fire is its property of causing the sensation
of burning. Could you show me a fire that would not hurt? Well,
prove now your point! Proceed! Argue!"

How could I argue? How could I argue when those thoughts were once
mine, though I was never able to dress them in such a splendid,
tempered armor. I remained silent.

"If your silence is intended to mean that you agree with me, then
let us talk as adults do after the children have gone to bed; let
us talk to the logical end. I ask: what was it that man from his
diaper age dreamed of, tormented himself for, prayed for? He longed
for that day when someone would tell him what happiness is and then
would chain him to it. What else are we doing now? The ancient
dream about a paradise.... Remember: there in paradise they know no
desires any more, no pity, no love; there they are all--blessed. An
operation has been performed upon their centre of fancy; that is why
they are blessed, angels, servants of God.... And now, at the very
moment when we have caught up with that dream, when we hold it like
this": (He clenched his hand so, that if he had held a stone in it
sap would have run out!) "At the moment when all that was left for
us was to adorn our prize and distribute it amongst all in equal
pieces, at that very moment you, you...."

The cast-iron roar was suddenly broken off. I was as red as a piece
of iron on an anvil, under the moulding sledge-hammer. This seemed
to have stopped for a second, hanging in air, and I waited, waited
... until suddenly:

"How old are you?"

"Thirty-two."

"Just double the age, and as simple as at sixteen! Listen. Is it
possible that it really never occurred to you that _they_ (we do
not yet know their names but I am certain you will disclose them to
us), that _they_ were interested in you only as the Builder of the
_Integral?_ only in order to be able through the use of you--"

"Don't! Don't!" I cried. But it was like protecting yourself with
your hands and crying to a bullet: you may still be hearing your
own "don't" but the bullet meanwhile has burned you through, and
writhing with pain, you are prostrated on the ground.

Yes, yes; the Builder of the _Integral_.... Yes, yes.... At once
there came back to me the angry face of U- with twitching, brick-red
gills, on that morning when both of them....

I remember now, clearly, how I raised my eyes and laughed. A
Socrates-like, bald-headed man was sitting before me; and small
drops of sweat dotted the bald surface of his cranium.

How simple, how magnificently trivial everything was! How simple!
Almost to the point of being ridiculous. Laughter was choking me and
bursting forth in puffs; I covered my mouth with my hand and rushed
wildly out....

Steps. Wind. Damp, leaping fragments of lights and faces.... And
while running: "No! Only to see her! To see her once more!"

Here again, an empty white page. All I remember is feet; not people,
just feet; hundreds of feet, confusedly stamping feet, falling
from somewhere on the pavement; a heavy rain of feet.... And some
cheerful, daring voice, and a shout that was probably for me: "Hey,
hey! Come here! Come along with us!"

Afterward--a deserted square heavily overloaded with tense wind. In
the middle of the square a dim, heavy threatening mass--the Machine
of the Well-Doer; and a seemingly unexpected image arose within me
in response to the sight of the Machine: a snow-white pillow and on
the pillow a head thrown back, and half-closed eyes and a sharp,
sweet line of teeth.... All this seemed so absurdly, so terribly
connected with the Machine. I know _how_ this connection has come
about but I do not yet want to see it nor to say it aloud--I don't
want to! I do not!

I closed my eyes, sat down on the steps which lead upwards to
the Machine. I must have been running for my face was wet. From
somewhere very far away cries were coming. But nobody heard them;
nobody heard me crying: "Save me from it--save me!"

If only I had a mother as the ancients had,--my mother, _mine_, for
whom I should be not the Builder of the _Integral_ and not D-530,
not a molecule of the United State but merely a living human piece,
a piece of herself, a trampled, smothered, a cast-off piece.... And
though I were driving the nails into the cross or being nailed to
it (perhaps it is the same), she would hear what no one else could
hear; her old grown-together wrinkled lips....




RECORD THIRTY-SEVEN

  Infusorian
  Doomsday
  Her Room


This morning while we were in the refectory, my neighbor to my left
whispered to me in a frightened tone:

"But why don't you eat? Don't you see, they are looking at you!"

I had to pluck up all my strength to show a smile. I felt it--like a
crack in my face; I smiled and the borders of the crack drew apart
wider and wider; it was quite painful.

What followed was this: no sooner had I lifted the small cube of
paste upon my fork, than my fork jerked from my hand and tinkled
against the plate, and at once the tables, the walls, the plates,
the air even, trembled and rang; and outside too, an enormous, iron,
round roar reaching the sky--floating over heads and houses it died
away in the distance in small, hardly perceptible circles like those
upon water.

I saw faces instantaneously grow faded and bleached; I saw mouths
filled with food suddenly motionless and forks hanging in air. Then
everything became confused, jumped off the centuries-old tracks,
everybody jumped up from his place (without singing the Hymn!)
and confusedly, in disorder, hastily finishing chewing, choking,
grasping one another.... They were asking: "What? What happened?
What?..." And the disorderly fragments of the Machine which was once
perfect and great, fell down in all directions,--down the elevators,
down the stairs.... Stamping of feet.... Pieces of words like pieces
of torn letters carried by the wind....

The same outpour from the neighboring houses. A minute later the
avenue seemed like a drop of water under a microscope: the infusoria
locked up in the transparent, glass-like drop of water were tossing
around, to the sides, up and down.

"Ah!" Some one's triumphant voice. I saw the back of a neck
and a finger pointing to the sky. I remember very distinctly a
yellow-pinkish nail and under the nail a crescent crawling out as if
from under the horizon. The finger was like a compass; all eyes were
raised to the sky.

There, running away from an invisible pursuit, masses of cloud
were rushing upon each other; and colored by the clouds the aeros
of the Guardians, with their tubes like antennae, were floating.
And farther to the west--something like.... At first nobody could
understand what it was, even I, who knew (unfortunately) more
than the others. It was like a great hive of black aeros swarming
somewhere at an extraordinary height--they looked like hardly
noticeable, swiftly moving points.... Nearer and nearer.... Hoarse,
guttural sounds began to reach the earth and finally we saw _birds_
just over our heads! They filled the sky with their sharp, black,
descending triangles. The stormy wind drove them down and they began
to land on the cupolas, on the roofs, poles and balconies.

"Ah--ah!" and the triumphant back of the neck turned, and I saw that
man with the protruding forehead but it seemed that the title, so
to speak, was all that was left of him: he seemed to have crawled
out from under his forehead and on his face, around the eyes and
lips, bunches of rays were growing. Through the noise of the wind
and wings and cawing, he cried to me:

"Do you realize? Do you realize! They have blown up the Wall! The
Wall has been blown up! Do you _understand_?"

Somewhere in the background, figures with their heads drawn in
were hastily rushing by, and into the houses. In the middle of the
pavement a mass of those who had been already operated upon; they
moved towards the west....

... Hairy bunches of rays around the lips and eyes.... I grasped his
hands:

"Tell me. Where is she? Where is I-330? There? Beyond the Wall
or...? I must.... Do you hear me? At once.... I cannot...."

"Here!" he shouted in a happy, drunken voice, showing strong yellow
teeth, "here in town, and she is acting! Oh, we are doing great
work!"

Who are those "we"? Who am I?

There were about fifty around him. Like him, they seemed to have
crawled out from under their foreheads. They were loud, cheerful,
strong-toothed, swallowing the stormy wind. With their simple, not
at all terrible-looking electrocutors (where did they get them?)
they started to the west, towards the operated ones, encircling
them, keeping parallel to forty-eighth avenue....

Stumbling against the tightly-drawn ropes woven by the wind, I
was running to her. What for? I did not know. I was stumbling....
Empty streets.... The city seemed foreign, wild, filled with the
ceaseless, triumphant, hubbub of birds. It seemed like the end of
the world, _Doomsday_.

Through the glass of the walls in quite a few houses (this
cut into my mind) I saw male and female Numbers in shameless
embraces--without curtains lowered, without pink checks, in the
middle of the day!...

The house--her house; the door ajar. The lobby, the control desk,
all was empty. The elevator had stopped in the middle of its shaft.
I ran panting up the endless stairs. The corridor. Like the spokes
of a wheel figures on the doors dashed past my eyes; 320, 326,
330,--I-330! Through the glass wall everything in her room was seen
to be upside down, confused, creased. The table overturned, its legs
in the air like a beast. The bed was absurdly placed away from the
wall, obliquely. Strewn over the floor--fallen, trodden petals of
the pink checks.

I bent over and picked up one, two, three of them; all bore the
name D-503. I was on all of them, drops of myself, of my molten,
poured-out self. And that was all--that was left....

Somehow I felt they should not lie there on the floor and be trodden
upon. I gathered a handful of them, put them on the table and
carefully smoothed them out, glanced at them and ... laughed aloud!
I never knew it before but now I know, and you too, know, that
laughter may be of different colors. It is but a distant echo of an
explosion within us; it may be the echo of a holiday, red, blue and
golden fireworks, or at times it may represent pieces of human flesh
exploded into the air....

I noticed an unfamiliar name on some of the pink checks. I do not
remember the figures but I do remember the letter--F. I brushed
the stubs from the table to the floor, stepped on them, on myself,
stamped on them with my heels,--and went out....

I sat in the corridor on the window-sill in front of her door and
waited long and stupidly. An old man appeared. His face was like
a pierced, empty bladder with folds; from beneath the puncture
something transparent was still slowly dripping. Slowly, vaguely I
realized--tears. And only when the old man was quite far off I came
to and exclaimed:

"Please ... listen.... Do you know ... Number I-330?"

The old man turned around, waved his hand in despair and stumbled
farther away....

I returned home at dusk. On the west side the sky was twitching
every second in a pale blue electric convulsion:--a subdued, heavy
roar was proceeding from that direction. The roofs were covered with
black charred sticks,--birds.

I lay down; and instantly like a heavy beast sleep came and stifled
me....




RECORD THIRTY-EIGHT

I Don't Know What Title--Perhaps the Whole Synopsis May Be Called
a Cast-off Cigarette-butt.


I awoke. A bright glare painful to look at. I half closed my eyes.
My head seemed filled with some caustic blue smoke. Everything was
enveloped in fog and through the fog:

"But I did not turn on the light ... then how is it...."

I jumped up. At the table, leaning her chin on her hand and smiling,
was I-330, looking at me.

She was at the very table at which I am now writing. Those ten or
fifteen minutes are already behind me, cruelly twisted into a very
firm spring. Yet it seems to me that the door closed after her only
a second ago and that I could still overtake her and grasp her
hand,--and that she might laugh out and say....

I-330 was at the table. I rushed towards her.

"You? You! I have been.... I saw your room.... I thought you...."
But midway I hurt myself upon the sharp, motionless spears of her
eyelashes and I stopped. I remembered: she looked at me in the same
way before,--in the _Integral_. It was urgent to tell her everything
in one second and in such a way that she should believe--or she
would never....

"Listen, I-330, I must.... I must ... everything! No, no, one
moment--let me have a glass of water first."

My mouth was as dry as though it were lined with blotting paper. I
poured a glass of water but I could not.... I put the glass back
upon the table, and with both hands firmly grasped the carafe.

Now I noticed that the blue smoke was from a cigarette. She brought
the cigarette to her lips and with avidity she drew in and swallowed
the smoke as I did water; then she said:

"Don't. Be silent. Don't you see it matters little? I came anyway.
They are waiting for me below.... Do you want these minutes which
are our last...?"

Abruptly she threw the cigarette on the floor and bent backwards
over the side of the chair to reach the button in the wall (it was
quite difficult to do so), and I remember how the chair swayed
slightly, how two of its legs were lifted. Then the curtains fell.

She came close to me and embraced me. Her knees, through her dress,
were like a slow, gentle, warm, enveloping and permeating poison....

Suddenly (it happens at times) you plunge into sweet, warm
sleep--when all at once, as if something pricks you, you tremble and
your eyes are again widely open. So it was now; there on the floor
in her room were the pink checks stamped with traces of footsteps,
one of them bore the letter F. and some figures.... Plus and minus
fused within my mind into one lump.... I could not say even now what
sort of a feeling it was but I crushed her so that she cried out
with pain....

One more minute out of these ten or fifteen; her head thrown back,
lying on the bright white pillow, her eyes half closed, a sharp,
sweet line of teeth.... And all this reminded me in an irresistible,
absurd, torturing way about something forbidden, something not
permissible at that moment. More tenderly, more cruelly, I pressed
her to myself, more bright grew the blue traces of my fingers....

She said, without opening her eyes (I noticed this), "They say you
went to see the Well-Doer yesterday, is it true?"

"Yes."

Then her eyes opened widely and with delight I looked at her and saw
that her face grew quickly paler and paler, that it effaced itself,
disappearing,--only the eyes remained.

I told her everything. Only for some reason, what I don't know--(no,
it is not true, I know the reason) I was silent about one thing: His
assertion at the end that they needed me only in order....

Like the image on a photographic plate in a developing fluid, her
face gradually reappeared; the cheeks, the white line of teeth, the
lips. She stood up and went to the mirror-door of the closet. My
mouth was dry again. I poured water but it was revolting to drink
it; I put the glass back on the table and asked:

"Did you come to see me because you wanted to inquire...?"

A sharp, mocking triangle of brows drawn to the temples looked at
me from the mirror. She turned around to say something but said
nothing.

It was not necessary; I knew.

To bid her good-bye, I moved my foreign limbs, struck the chair with
them. It fell upside down, dead, like the table in her room. Her
lips were cold ... just as cold was once the floor, here, near my
bed....

When she left I sat down on the floor, bent over the
cigarette-butt....

I cannot write any more--I no longer want to!




RECORD THIRTY-NINE

The End


All this was like the last crystal of salt thrown into a saturated
solution; quickly, needle-like crystals began to appear, to grow
more substantial and solid. It was clear to me; the decision was
made and tomorrow morning _I shall do it_! It amounts to suicide
but perhaps then I shall be re-born. For only what is killed can be
re-born.

Every second the sky twitched in convulsion there in the west. My
head was burning and pulsating inside; I was up all night and I fell
asleep only at about seven o'clock in the morning when the darkness
of the night was already dispelled and becoming gray and when the
roofs crowded with birds became visible....

I woke up; ten o'clock. Evidently the bell did not ring today. On
the table--left from yesterday--there stood the glass of water.
I gulped the water down with avidity and I ran; I had to do it
quickly, as quickly as possible.

The sky was deserted, blue, all eaten up by the storm. Sharp corners
of shadows.... Everything seemed to be cut out of blue autumnal
air--thin, dangerous to touch; it seemed so brittle, ready to
disperse into glass dust. Within me something similar; I ought not
to think; it was dangerous to think, for....

And I did not think, perhaps I did not even see properly; I
only registered impressions. There on the pavement, thrown from
somewhere, branches were strewn; their leaves were green, amber and
cherry-red. Above, crossing each other, birds and aeros were tossing
about. Here below heads, open mouths, hands waving branches.... All
this must have been shouting, buzzing, chirping....

Then--streets empty as if swept by a plague. I remember I stumbled
over something disgustingly soft, yielding yet motionless. I bent
down--a corpse. It was lying flat, the legs apart. The face.... I
recognized the thick negro lips which even now seemed to sprinkle
with laughter. His eyes, firmly screwed in, laughed into my face.
One second.... I stepped over him and ran. I could no longer.... I
had to have everything done as soon as possible, or else I felt I
would break, I would break in two like an overloaded sail....

Luckily it was not more than twenty steps away; I already saw the
sign with the golden letters: "The Bureau of Guardians." At the
door I stopped for a moment to gulp down as much air as I could and
stepped in.

Inside, in the corridor stood an endless chain of numbers, holding
small sheets of paper and heavy note-books. They moved slowly,
advancing a step or two and stopping again. I began to be tossed
about along the chain, my head was breaking to pieces; I pulled
them by the sleeves, I implored them as a sick man implores to be
given something that would even at the price of sharpest pain end
everything, forever.

A woman with a belt tightly clasped around her waist over the unif
and with two distinctly protruding squatty hemispheres tossing about
as if she had eyes on them, chuckled at me:

"He has a belly-ache! Show him to the room second door to the
right!"

Everybody laughed, and because of that laughter something rose in my
throat; I felt I should either scream or ... or....

Suddenly from behind some one touched my elbow. I turned around.
Transparent wing-ears! But they were not pink as usual; they were
purplish red; his Adam's apple was tossing about as though ready to
tear the covering....

Quickly boring into me: "What are you here for?"

I seized him.

"Quickly! Please! Quickly! ... into your office.... I must tell
everything ... right away.... I am glad that you.... It may be
terrible that it should be you to whom.... But it is well, it is
well...."

He too, knew _her_; this made it even more tormenting for me. But
perhaps he too, would tremble when he should hear.... And we would
both be killing.... And I would not be alone at that, my supreme
second....

The door closed with a slam. I remember a piece of paper was
caught beneath the door and it rustled on the floor when the
door closed. And then a strange airless silence covered us as if
a glass bell were put over us. If only he had uttered a single,
most insignificant word, no matter what, I should have told him
everything at once. But he was silent. So keyed up that I heard a
noise in my ears, I said without looking at him:

"I think I always hated her from the very beginning.... I
struggled.... Or, no, no, don't believe me; I could have but I did
not want to save myself; I wanted to perish; this was dearer to
me than anything else ... and even now, even this minute, when I
know already everything.... Do you know that I was summoned to the
Well-Doer?"

"Yes, I do."

"But what he told me! Please realize that it was equivalent to ...
it was as if some one should remove the floor from under you this
minute, and you and all here on the desk, the papers, the ink ...
the ink would splash out and cover everything with blots...."

"What else? What further? Hurry up, others are waiting!"

Then stumbling, muttering, I told him everything that is recorded
in these pages.... About my real self, and about my hairy self, and
about my hands ... yes ... exactly that was the beginning. And
how I would not do my duty then, and how I lied to myself, and how
she obtained false certificates for me, and how I grew worse and
worse, every day, and about the long corridors underground, and
there beyond the Wall....

All this I threw out in formless pieces and lumps. I would stutter
and fail to find words. The lips double-curved in a smile would
prompt me with the word I needed and I would nod gratefully: "Yes,
yes!".... Suddenly, what was it? He was talking for me and I only
listened and nodded: "Yes, yes," and then, "Yes, exactly so, ...
yes, yes...."

I felt cold around my mouth as though it were wet with ether, and I
asked with difficulty:

"But how is it.... You could not learn anywhere...."

He smiled a smile growing more and more curved; then:

"But I see that you do want to conceal from me something. For
example, you enumerated everything you saw beyond the Wall but you
failed to mention one thing. You deny it? But don't you remember
that once, just in passing, just for a second you saw me there? Yes,
yes _me_!"

Silence.

Suddenly, like a flash of lightning, it became shamelessly clear to
me: he--he too--. And all myself, my torment, all that I brought
here, crushed by the burden, plucking up my last strength as if
performing a great feat, all appeared to me only funny,--like the
ancient anecdote about Abraham and Isaac; Abraham all in a cold
sweat, with the knife already raised over his son, over himself--and
suddenly a voice from above: "Never mind.... I was only joking."

Without taking my eyes from the smile which grew more and more
curved, I put my hands on the edge of the desk and slowly, very
slowly pushed myself with my chair away from him. Then instantly
gathering myself into my own hands, I dashed madly out, past loud
voices, past steps and mouths....

I do not remember how I got into one of the public rest-rooms at a
station of the Underground Railway. Above, everything was perishing;
the greatest civilization, the most rational in human history was
crumbling,--but here, by some irony everything remained as before,
beautiful. The walls shone; water murmured cosily and like the
water,--the unseen, transparent music.... Only think of it! All this
is doomed; all this will be covered with grass, some day; only myths
will remain....

I moaned aloud. At the same instant I felt someone gently patting
my knee. It was from the left; it was my neighbor who occupied a
seat on my left,--an enormous forehead, a bald parabola, yellow
unintelligible lines of wrinkles on his forehead, those lines about
me.

"I understand you. I understand completely," he said. "Yet you must
calm yourself. You must. It will return. It will inevitably return.
It is only important that everybody should learn of my discovery.
You are the first to whom I talk about it. I have calculated that
there is no _infinity_! No!"

I looked at him wildly.

"Yes, yes, I tell you so. There is no infinity. If the universe is
infinite, then the average density of matter must equal zero, but
as it is not zero, we know, consequently the universe is finite; it
is spherical in form and the square of its radius--R2--is equal
to the average density multiplied by.... The only thing left is to
calculate the numerical coefficient and then.... Do you realize
what it means? It means that everything is final, everything is
simple.... But you, my honored sir, you disturb me, you prevent my
finishing my calculations by your yelling!"

I do not know which shattered me more, his discovery, or his
positiveness at that apocalyptic hour. I only then noticed that he
had a notebook in his hands and a logarithmic dial. I understood
then that even if everything was perishing it was my duty (before
you, my unknown and beloved) to leave these records in a finished
form.

I asked him to give me some paper, and here in the rest-room to the
accompaniment of the quiet music, transparent like water, I wrote
down these last lines.

I was about to put down a period as the ancients would put a cross
over the caves into which they used to throw their dead, when all of
a sudden my pencil trembled and fell from between my fingers....

"Listen!" (I pulled my neighbor). "Yes, listen, I say. There where
your finite universe ends, what is there? What?"

He had no time to answer. From above, down the steps, stamping....




RECORD FORTY

  Facts
  The Bell
  I Am Certain


Daylight. It is clear. The barometer--760 mm. It is possible that I,
D-503, really wrote these--pages? Is it possible that I ever felt,
or imagined I felt all this?

The handwriting is mine. And what follows is all in my handwriting.
Fortunately only the handwriting. No more delirium, no absurd
metaphors, no feelings,--only facts. For I am healthy, perfectly,
absolutely healthy.... I am smiling; I cannot help smiling; a
splinter has been taken out of my head and I feel so light, so
empty! To be more exact, not empty, but there is nothing foreign,
nothing that prevents me from smiling. (Smiling is the normal state
for a normal human being).

The facts are as follows: That evening my neighbor who discovered
the finiteness of the universe, and I, and all others who did not
have a certificate showing that we had been operated on, all of us
were taken to the nearest auditorium. (For some reason the number
of the auditorium, 112, seemed familiar to me). There they tied
us to the tables and performed the great operation. Next day, I,
D-503, appeared before the Well-Doer and told him everything known
to me about the enemies of happiness. Why before it seemed hard for
me to go, I cannot understand. The only explanation seems to be my
illness,--my soul.

The same evening, sitting at the same table with Him, with the
Well-Doer, I saw for the first time in my life the famous Gas
Chamber. They brought in that woman. She was to testify in my
presence. That woman remained stubbornly silent and smiling. I
noticed that she had sharp and very white teeth which were very
pretty.

Then she was brought under the Bell. Her face became very white
and as her eyes were large and dark,--all was very pretty. When
they began pumping the air from under the Bell she threw her head
back and half closed her eyes; her lips were pressed together. This
reminded me of something. She looked at me, holding the arms of the
chair firmly. She continued to look until her eyes closed. Then she
was taken out and brought to by means of electrodes and again put
under the Bell. The procedure was repeated three times, yet she did
not utter a word.

The others who were brought in with that woman, proved to be more
honest; many of them began to speak after the first trial. Tomorrow
they will all ascend the steps to the Machine of the Well-Doer.
No postponement is possible for there still is chaos, groaning,
cadavers, beasts in the western section, and to our regret there
are still quantities of Numbers who betrayed Reason.

But on the transverse avenue Forty, we succeeded in establishing a
temporary Wall of high voltage waves. And I hope we win. More than
that; I am certain we shall win. For Reason must win.

THE END




Transcriber's note:

Many hyphenation inconsistencies have been regularized. Punctuation
misprints and misplaced quote marks have been silently corrected.
Minor spelling corrections and original page boundaries have been
recorded in html comments.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of We, by Yevgeny Zamyatin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WE ***

***** This file should be named 61963-8.txt or 61963-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/9/6/61963/

Produced by Andrew Sly, Mary Glenn Krause, University of
Michigan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images
made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
